Philosophical Writings Selected
from the Waste Books


The great trick of regarding small deviations from the truth as the truth itself—a trick upon which the whole of differential calculus is based—isalso the basis of our ingenious thoughts, where the whole thing would often collapse if we were to consider the deviations with philosophical rigor. [1] It is a question whether in the arts and sciences a best is possible beyond which our understanding cannot reach. This point is perhaps infinitely distant, yet with every approximation we have less ahead of us.

To create a charicteristica universalis, we must first abstract from the syntax of language; syntax is a certain music we have composed, which in a few cases (“femme sage, sage femme”) has its peculiar use. If we are to make progress in our characteristica, we first require a language that adheres to concepts, or we must at least seek one for special cases. But since our most important decisions, when we think them without words, are often only points, such a language would be as difficult to formulate as the others that are supposed to be derived from it.

When one believes—as metaphysicians often do—that one understands something one really does not, it could be called affirmative nescire.1 [5] It is difficult to say how we came to possess our current concepts. No one, or very few of us, would be able to recount when they first heard mention of the name Leibniz. To explain how we first acquired the belief that all men are mortal would be still more difficult; we do not arrive at this idea as quickly as one would believe. If it is this difficult to explain the origin of phenomena that occur within us, how will we fare in this respect when we wish to establish something about the things outside us?  [. . .] The question is really whether we arrived at geometry through the division of farmland or if we merely applied a previously discovered theory.  Such division certainly could not be performed without geometry, and even the most ignorant farmer would discover geometrical propositions when dividing a field into equal parts. Only a people can advance things in this matter without ever arriving at the proposition of the equivalence of ∆ ∆.  Our gardeners are no geometers, yet only they are adept in resolving many situations. It is indeed a question what in everyday life most cleverly leads men to discover the most important geometrical propositions. To be sure, they do not arrive there by a straight line.2

The discovery of the most significant truths depends upon a subtle abstraction, yet our everyday life, with its competencies, habits, and routines, constantly endeavors to make us incapable of this. It is the work of philosophers to unlearn these trivial mindless abilities, which we have acquired through observation since childhood. Thus even as a child, a philosopher should already be educated differently.

When we look at an object, we simultaneously see many others but less distinctly. The question is whether this is habituation or whether it has another cause. If the first is the case, we should be able to become accustomed to seeing things distinctly without directly attending to them.  

In some sciences, the endeavor to discover a universal principle may often be just as fruitless as the endeavor of a mineralogist to discover some primary universal element through the compounding of which all minerals arose. Nature creates neither genera nor species, but individua, and in our shortsightedness, we must seek out similarities to be able to retain many things simultaneously. These concepts become more and more inaccurate the broader the categories are which we create.

The greatest things in the world are brought about by others, to which we pay no attention, insignificant causes that we overlook but that eventually accumulate.

In his novel Émile, Rousseau rightly calls accent the soul of speech. We often think people stupid, but upon examination we discover it is only their simple tone or accent that makes them seem this way. Since tone is not conveyed in writing, the reader must be directed to it by being shown more clearly through phrasing where it belongs. This is what distinguishes ordinary speech from a letter and what should distinguish a merely printed speech from one that is actually delivered.

The influence of style upon our attitudes and thoughts, which I have discussed elsewhere, is evident even in Linnaeus, who is usually quite precise; he suggests that stones grow, plants grow and live, and animals grow, live, and sense. The first is false because the growth of a stone bears no resemblance to that of plants and animals. The intensification of expression, which he noticed in the latter series, probably led him to include the former in this classification.4

To match versification to the thought is a very difficult art, the neglect of which is responsible for much ridiculous verse. Versification and thought are related to one another as in everyday life savoir-vivre is to occupation. [23] If we wish to create a philosophy of use to us in life or wish to give general principles for a perpetually contented life, we must certainly abstract from what introduces too much diversity in our observations—much as in mechanics we ignore friction or other similar particular properties of bodies, so our calculations are not so cumbersome, or we at least replace them with a single letter. Insignificant mishaps undeniably introduce much uncertainty into our practical principles, so we must dismiss them and attend to overcoming the significant ones. This is undoubtedly the true meaning of certain propositions in the Stoic philosophy.5

The superstition of ordinary people originates in their early and all too zealous instruction in religion, where they hear of secrets, miracles, and acts of the devil and believe it probable such things might occur everywhere in anything. If, however, they were first taught about nature, they would more readily regard the supernatural and mysterious aspects of religion with greater awe rather than considering them quite commonplace as they now do—so commonplace, indeed, that they do not think it extraordinary when someone tells them that today six angels crossed the street. Neither are the images in the Bible good for children.

Habit might be called a moral friction: something that does not allow the mind to glide easily over things but joins it to them so it cannot easily free itself.

In the everyday question of how to do something in the best possible way, we are seeking a certain maximum.

The proof advanced by philosophers that there is a future life, which consists in their saying that were it not the case then God could not reward our final moments, belongs to the proofs by analogy. We reward only after the fact, thus God must also. We do this out of lack of anticipation, but where we are not thus hindered we also reward in advance, as we pay in advance our university tuition. Might God not also have paid in advance?  When Plutarch says that the victor is not crowned during the battle but only afterward, he is similarly obscure; it is a mere analogy, a kind of proof that is both false and cruel.

Death is a constant quantity—only pain is variable and may be intensified infinitely. Those who defend torture must admit this, or they torture in vain. In many, pain reaches a maximum and yet is < death.

The argument against the materialists offered in Herr Unzer’s journal Der Arzt, and that derives from the mutability of our body, truly has some force.  Certainly the parts of my body are no longer me when I am a few years older, so how could successive souls, so to speak, impart consciousness to one another? One might respond that the transformation is very gradual, just as traditions have been passed on even though every eighty years the earth itself is different. This is how La Mettrie would respond. Another

continues to act, perhaps in a manner like a spark to gun powder.6

Prejudices are, so to speak, the acquired instincts of human beings: through prejudice we can accomplish many things we would find too difficult to think through to the point of decision.

According to Home, in seeing and hearing we do not sense the immediate contact of bodies outside of us in the same way as with other senses. (If we had no eyes, perhaps the feeling of sensations would seem as equally to occur within us; it is only because we have eyes that we locate sensations where we see a cause for them p.m.)7

Whenever we read a good thought, we should see if something similar might be thought and said about another matter, assuming here that it has some affinity with the former. This is a kind of analysis of thought that perhapssome scholars adopt without saying.  Understanding the meaning of a word in our mother tongue often takes us many years. I also have in mind understanding the meaning tone can lend to a word. The meaning of a word is, if I may express myself mathematically, given by a formula in which the tone is the variable and the word is the constant quantity. This opens the possibility of infinitely enriching language without increasing the number of words. I have found that the phrase “It is good” is pronounced in five different ways, each time with another meaning, which is often determined by yet a third variable, namely, the facial expression.

If substances possess properties that allow others to apprehend them, then we can at once be members of different worlds without being conscious of ourselves in more than one of them, for the properties of substances are, in a manner of speaking, permeable. Thus we can die in one world and continue to live in another.

If we could organize our most abstract principles, which our reason apprehends without much previous sensation, in such a way as to facilitate a transition to their application, it would produce a practical metaphysics— only this transition currently eludes our metaphysics.  [97] We ourselves are the measure of the miraculous. Were we to seek a common measure, the miraculous would disappear and all things be reduced to the same size.

Minds or spirits without an external world must be strange indeed; since the ground of every thought lies within it, even the most fantastic combinations of ideas would always be correct. We call people insane when the order of their concepts no longer corresponds to the sequence of events in our orderly world; thus a careful observation of nature, or even mathematics, is certainly the most effective preventative of insanity; nature is, so to speak, the guide rope by which our thoughts are lead, so they do not stray. [111] The grocer who weighs something is as much engaged in placing an unknown quantity on one side and a known quantity on the other as the algebraist.

The conflict over meaning and being, which has done so much harm in religion, might have done more good had it been fought on other fields, for it is a common source of our misfortune that we believe things actually

to be what they really only mean.  It is an entirely unavoidable defect of all languages that they express only the genera of concepts and seldom can say adequately what they wish to say.  For if we compare our words with things, we discover that the latter consist in a wholly different order from the former. The properties we observe in our souls are connected in such a way that it is not easy to delineate a boundary between them, but the words with which we express them are not constituted in this way. Two successive and related properties are expressed with signs that seem to indicate no relationship with one another. We should be able to decline words philosophically and to indicate their relationship through modifications. In the geometrical analysis of a line a, one indefinite section of it is called x; the other section is not called y, as in ordinary life, but a – x. This is why mathematical language has such great advantages over ordinary language.

When Plato says passions and natural desires are the wings of the soul, his expression is enlightening; such comparisons illuminate the matter and are, as it were, translations of the difficult concepts of one man into a language

understood by all—true definitions.  Undoubtedly creatures might exist whose organs are so sensitive that they are unable to reach through a ray of light, just as we are unable to reach

through a stone because our hands would be destroyed.  Perhaps a thought is the cause of all motion in the world, and the philosophers who taught that the world is an animal perhaps arrived at the idea this way; but they may not have expressed themselves as exactly as they perhaps should have. Our entire world is only the effect upon matter of one of God’s thoughts.

The world is a body common to all people; changes in it bring about changes in the souls of all people who are facing only a part. Not to exist means to natural scientists, at least a certain class of them, the same as not to be perceived.

It never occurs to the peasant who believes the moon is no bigger than a plough wheel that at a distance of a few miles an entire church appears no larger than a white speck, while the moon always appears the same size.  Since he possesses these ideas separately, what prevents him from connecting them? In his everyday life, he does connect ideas, perhaps in more elaborate ways than these. This reflection should grab the attention of philosophers, for in certain connections of thought they are perhaps still peasants. We think early enough in life, but we do not know that we are thinking any more than we know we are growing or digesting; among ordinary people, few ever realize this. A close observation of things outside us leads quickly back to the point of observation, that is, ourselves; conversely, anyone who once becomes fully aware of himself is readily led to the observation of the world around him. Be attentive, experience nothing in vain, measure and compare—this is the entire law of philosophy.

Whatever one sees, does, or reads, it should always be brought to such a degree of clarity that one can at least answer the most general objections against it and then it can become part of the structure of our science. To this structure nothing disputable should be added. If something generally assumed cannot be united with our system, then perhaps we are still missing foundational ideas, and discovering this is a great achievement. 

Human philosophy is never other than the philosophy of one particular individual corrected by that of others, even fools, according to the rules of a rational appraisal of degrees of probability. Propositions to which everyone assents are true. If they are not true, then there is no truth.  Other propositions we are often compelled to hold true on the assurance of experts, and any man would believe such propositions were he to find himself in the same circumstances. Where this is not the case, we have a particular philosophy and not one established in the council of mankind.  Superstition itself is a local philosophy voicing its opinion as well. 

Growing wiser means becoming increasingly acquainted with the errors to which our instrument of feeling and judging may be subject. Today, cautiousness in judgment is to be recommended to each and every one. If we reap but one incontestable truth every ten years from each philosopher, our harvest would be rich enough.  

Every mathematical expression is in effect a mirror.

Many relations in nature are neither arithmetical nor geometrical and are thus difficult for us to specify or describe. Perhaps such relations can be reduced to those we have already discovered. [. . .]

The abacus pythagoricus is an elegant visual representation of our rational syllogisms. [. . .] As the simplest representation of the comparison of ideas, the imitation of this device would be quite useful in other sciences, if we could represent magnitude here without presupposing extension.

To explain why some people feel an incredible sensation when they see someone chew coal or cut extinguished coal or coarse stone with a sharp

The microscope magnifies surfaces (lines), leaves angles unaltered, and reduces curves.

Rain, snow, and wind follow one another in such a way that we discern no certain law in their order. But we conceive of laws only in order to simplify our conceptions of things, just as we create races.

Any object can be magnified with a microscope, but an angle cannot.  Our senses relate to the things around us in such a way that by the time something appears to our senses, they have unbeknownst to us already made their most important contributions. The state of things before their sensible appearance, the Greeks called ἄδης and the other they called φῶς or Ζεὺς whose brother was ἄδης Pluto. [. . .]9

Late one evening, Socrates wanted into his house but was scolded from the window by Xanthippe, who finally dumped the chamber pot on his head.  “With such a storm,” he remarked, “I knew it would rain.”

The Stoics deny degrees of morality; according to them, all crimes are equal

What would this be had I discovered it myself according to the structure of my own system of thought?

Make natural observations before subtle ones, and seek always a simple and natural explanation.

Things most often forgotten, places overlooked, and things accepted without question deserve most often to be investigated.

Silence is not silence, and white is not white—we only suppose this. What we do not observe does not exist for us.

Perhaps this arose in me only through constant habituation since childhood.  What insights we would have if we could once divest our wealth of truths of things not essentially true but only accrued through frequent repetition.

The most common ideas and those upon which everyone agrees deserve most often to be investigated, but in misgivings about this one should always remember what Franklin says in his Experiments and Observations on Electricity: “If we propose our objections modestly we shall tho’ mistaken, deserve a censure less severe, than when we are both mistaken and insolent.”10

Ask yourself whether you can explain the insignificant details; this is the only means to create an accurate system, probe its strengths, and put your readings to use.

A single word might be replaced with six; we express too much with one and the same word.

To investigate what is mutable and what eternal in a matter, and at leastto indicate where certainty ceases.
We know for certain how to designate the limits of error, and where doubt remains, precise inaccuracy begins.

41

Does it originate in human nature?

[316]

Is it actually that which it appears to be?

[319]

Can we give another reason for this?

[327]

What am I overlooking here as a result of my limited understanding? [332]
Circumstances.

[336]

Final Causes.

[337]
Whenever he had to reason, he felt like someone who had always used his
right hand but was now forced to do something with his left.
[1]
In recalling our past pleasures, we depart from our present physical body,
transporting ourselves entirely in abstracto back to a previous time as an
Arcadian being without debts, cares, or needy relatives, for we are not able
to imagine for ourselves the unified effect of different impressions as easily
as we can that of a single one.
[33]
We infer, perhaps too quickly, from the intelligent constitution of the
instincts of animals, the existence of a supremely intelligent being; it need
only be more intelligent than we are.
[34]
There are very few things we can conceive of through all five senses. [37]
We see absolutely nothing of the soul unless it is manifested in the face. The
faces of a large assembly of people might be called a history of the human
soul, written in a kind of Chinese ideogram. Just as a magnet arranges iron
filings, the soul arranges around itself the features of the face, and differences
in the arrangement of these parts indicate differences in that which gave
rise to them. The longer one observes faces, the more one will notice in
so-called unremarkable faces traits that make them individual.
[69]
Of all the animals on earth, the human is closest to the ape.

[107]

He was the author of various articles that appeared here and there in journals
under the heading Nonsense.
[108]
43
The thing of whose eyes and ears we see nothing and of whose nose and
head we see very little—in short, our body.
[109]
Little two-penny judgments, virtues, truths.

[116]

This is as certain as (a–x) 3 (a+x) = a2 – x2.

[120]

Logica palaestrica, metaphysica
gladiatorio-offensiva.

terminologico-visionaria,

and

citica
[147]

Just as there is a post/μετὰ φυσικὰ so too could we devise a προ/
antephysica—this would be Geometry.11
[148]
He understood philosophy as the everyday man usually does: he reasoned
and formed hypotheses in his housekeeping—in short, what for the Kästners
and Leibnizes is the world was for him the place between Bossiegel and
Schmalen’s shop.12
[177]
The notion of a mathematical method is ridiculous; it should be called the
“natural” method because this alone is applied in mathematics. It is as if
one were to say that in the end the masons of the tower of Babel worked
according to pandectic law.
[190]
To the wise, nothing is immeasurable and nothing insignificant, especially
when he is doing philosophy—assuming he is not hungry or thirsty or
has not forgotten his snuff if he uses it. In this case, I believe he could
compose an essay on keyholes, which would sound as important as one on
jus naturae and be equally as enlightening. As only few sages well know,
in minor everyday occurrences one can discover a moral principle just as
readily as in the major ones. [. . .]
[195]
He possessed a great deal of philosophical insight, or common sense that
looked like it.
[205]
Do not always say that since something is one way it follows that something
else will be another. Let your emotions speak as well! Until now reason
could not be expressed and long remained silent, but since the storm has
calmed, her voice can once again be heard.
[211]
He used his little stick to measure all kinds of things, physical as well as
moral, and would often say, “I am not so concerned with it,” indicating on
[215]
the stick with his thumb nail his degree of concern.
Who is there? Only I. This is already saying too much.

[240]

If an angel were to tell us something of his philosophy, I believe many
[242]
propositions would sound like 2 times 2 equals 13.
Even if suicides could give reasons for their act in their own language, it
would do no good. Every hearer would only reduce them to his own language
and in so doing would not so much weaken them as transform them entirely.
To properly understand someone, it would be necessary occasionally to be
the person one wishes to understand. Whoever understands what a system
of thought is will agree with me. To be frequently alone, to think about
oneself, and to create a world of one’s own may bring great pleasure, but in
doing so, one imperceptibly creates a philosophy according to which suicide
is appropriate and permissible. It is a good thing then to anchor oneself to
the world by means of a girl or companion so that one does not fall off
completely.
[262]
In our premature and often all too extensive reading, by which we acquire
numerous materials without constructing anything from them and which
accustoms our memory to keep house for sensibility and taste, a profound
philosophy is often required to restore to our feelings their initial state of
innocence: to extricate one’s self from the detritus of alien ideas, to begin
to feel for oneself, to speak for oneself, and, I might almost say, to exist for
[264]
oneself.
The hypotheses of some newcomers do not yet contradict the evidence, but
[281]
I fear the evidence will soon contradict them.
One can really make oneself morally heavy, just as children believe they can
make their bodies heavier—one can intentionally suppress a fond desire and
do what is right.
[282]
It is an open question whether it is more difficult to think or not to think.
The human is compelled to think, and we all know how hard it is to suppress
such a compulsion. Surely then, the small-minded really do not deserve the
contempt with which they are treated in every country these days. [308]

The whole man must move together

Something that covers the distance between two ends of a grain of sand
with the speed of lightning or light will appear to us to be at rest. [32]
That we do not investigate existence and meaning in other matters is a
[34]
blessing.
We often believe our handwriting differs at different times, yet to another
it always appears the same.
[48]
It is a prejudice of eighteenth-century Germany that writing is regarded as
the measure of merit—a sane and sound philosophy will perhaps gradually
[61]
dispel this prejudice.
Mr. Westenhof in Osnabrück mentioned that a farmer had once said to
him, “I heard that you speak painfully well.” Painfully well is a very common
idiom and means something like very well.
[88]
We could have continued to think and live without ever concerning ourselves
with why or how thought occurs; indeed philosophy first investigated things
outside of us before finally turning the microscope inward. A curious and
observant mind asked, “How does it come about that we think?”—few,
indeed not one in a million, even among professors who have explained

psychology, would have posed such a question. And yet how many now
ask why objects fall toward the earth? The force that brings this about,
and that is as little known to Euler as to Rudolph von Bellinkhaus, is as
necessary to our mortal felicity as the one that makes us think is to our
eternal felicity. The former has been attributed to spirits, but I know too
little of the history of human folly to say whether some ambitious religious
patriarch ever counted among the duties of man the propitiation of such
spirits, the dereliction of which would result in our weightless bodies being
scattered throughout the heavens. Astonishing inferences have been made
from the hypothesis that it is a spirit in us that thinks; to this the religious
patriarchs have added many other less evident ones with which to support
society, just as the other force supports the firmament. That this edifice
is too complex to be based on a human design, I would much prefer to
believe than that procreation is a human invention. Here we find God. But
he who seduced us to procreate by making it the greatest carnal pleasure
might also, through an implanted devotion, draw us together into a merely
temporary wellbeing; but is this not deception? To us it seems so.13 [91]
To wish to conclude some things from God’s wisdom is not much better
than to conclude them from one’s own understanding.
[103]
It is to be sure no small difficulty to teach philosophy with a purpose—the
child, the boy, the youth, and the man all have their own. How fortunate
it would be if one age worked for the advantage of another and one year
for the advantage of the next; if one produced a gear, another springs, and
yet another dials, then doubtless a fourth would produce a clock. If every
human inhabited his own planet, what would philosophy then be? Just
what it is now: the essence of a man’s opinions is his philosophy. [. . .]
The question: should I philosophize for myself? must, I think, be answered
in the same way as the question: should I shave myself? If someone were
to ask me this, I would answer: if you can do it properly, it is an excellent
thing. I always think that though we try to teach ourselves the latter, we
do not make our first attempt on the throat. Act as the wisest before you
have acted, and do not begin your philosophical exercises where an error
can deliver you into the hands of the executioner. [. . .]
[142]
The rules of grammar are merely human dictates, which is why the devil
himself speaks poor Latin through the possessed. [. . .]
[151]

Notebook C

49

In grasping their meaning, it was impossible for him not to disturb the
[158]
words.
A leg of mutton is better than nothing,
Nothing is better than heaven,
Therefore a leg of mutton is better than heaven.
In this syllogism, as in many pseudosyllogisms in which the word nothing
occurs, the ambiguity of the word is at fault. In the first line the word
nothing excludes only those things in the world that are worse than a leg
of mutton, among which “nothing” is included; in the second line, on the
other hand, the word nothing excludes everything in the world however
small or great it may be, which again includes “nothing.” In the first line,
nothing is a species of the latter from which no conclusion can be drawn
regarding the genus.
[179]
[. . .] It is well known to any observer of man how difficult it is to explain
[192]
experiences without the interference of judgment.
Catholics forget that, like history and knowledge in general, the beliefs of
man also change. To advance in one and abide in the other is impossible
for man. Even truth needs new apparel to appeal to a new age.
[223]
Is there then no difference between justice and oppression?

[249]

In perceiving something, we cannot withhold our judgment; that we do
this also with people is the foundation upon which someone has built
physiognomy.
[251]
I can comprehend it, but I cannot grasp it, and vice versa.

[277]

What Bacon says of the harmfulness of systems might be said of every
word. Often words that express an entire class or all steps on a ladder are
used to refer to individuals—here words become indefinite.
[278]
Because of the plurality of our senses, we need not be so attentive with
individual senses to the many features of an object. It is easier to recognize
something by its appearance or smell than its color or structure. [. . .] [290]

50

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

According to Buffon, there are perhaps more species of insects that cannot
be perceived with the human eye than plants on the entire earth.—But
plants that cannot be perceived by the human eye, how many could there
be?14
[292]
The often-repeated observation that each is best pleased by his own might
once again be subjected to lively and very philosophical scrutiny.
[301]
[. . .] Our earth is indeed the strangest planet for us, just as our soul is
the strangest substance, for we alone inhabit the one and are the other. If
only for a moment we could be something else. What would become of our
understanding if all objects really were what we take them to be? [. . .] [303]
Concerning love, Socrates distinguished between need and passion, between
the work of nature and the work of fantasy. He cautioned against the latter,
and for the satisfaction of the former he recommended a kind of love in
[325]
which the soul participated as little as possible. [. . .]
Do you perhaps believe that your convictions owe their strength to
arguments? Then you are undoubtedly mistaken, for if it were true everyone
who heard them would have to be as convinced as you are. The theologians
call Voltaire delusional, and he in turn calls them delusional; but since they
cannot prove with certainty that they are more reasonable than he, and since
he is more sophisticated and a better philosopher, the advantage is his. One
can be deluded in favor of a proposition as well as against it. Reasons are
often, and for the most part, only explanations of entitlements, by which
we give a coloring of legitimacy and rationality to something we would
have done in any case. Nature, it appears, did not wish to make such an
important thing as human conviction depend on logical deductions alone, as
these may easily deceive. The impulse to act, thank heavens, often takes us
by surprise, before we are half finished proving its necessity and utility. [332]
To appreciate which is the most simple of the two, one can understand the
meaning of a word in a simple or elaborate way.
[348]
Excellence is so difficult to attain in the arts and sciences because it means
the attainment of a certain fixed aim. To do something according to some
prescribed rule poorly would be equally as difficult—if doing so could still
be called doing it poorly.
[353]
We cannot say how anything would have turned out but only how we
believe it would have turned out.
[375]

Notebook D
1773–1775

Since the correctness of our judgments rests not so much on knowledge of
the opinions of others as on experience or knowledge of facts, the question
is how best to secure a wealth of these facts from which our judgments
arise. Is history the means, or does less association with others not already
bring us there?
[15]
Our dispositions are as diverse as our faces, for who could prove to us that
our inner constitutions, especially our brains, do not differ noticeably? How
varied also are the events that inform our attitudes and opinions? This is
why they are always human. Most people merely adopt the same opinions
as others. Germans go unbelievably far in this. In England, nearly everyone
has his own opinion, which is not to say that each has a different one. This
frees our judgment, whereas studied opinions restrict it. In the new world,
one could produce the masks of children from copper molds. We should
endeavor to learn facts and not opinions, giving these facts a place in our
system of beliefs. We should reason at least once about the most common
things and be wary of ever introducing another’s opinion, at least not qua
talis, if it is not our own. It is unbelievable the kinds of things people repeat
after one another. Even great men, who measure everything according their
own scale, in a moment of overconfidence, trade in something they have not
themselves weighed. It seems to me that herein lies the difference between
good and bad authors: one reasons from facts with his own ingenuity, while
the other incapably connects facts with garbled opinions. A good and a bad
author are not differentiated according to degree, which is why there are
famous yet terrible authors. That history is a great teacher is an adage that
will undoubtedly be repeated by many unexamined. We need only look

51

52

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

at how those who have elevated themselves through understanding have
acquired their knowledge; they acquire it from things themselves, where
things occur, not where they are recounted. History should be written this
way, but what historian is capable of this? This befits the great deeds, so
they ignite. When history writes that a hero from the Battle of Minden is
a great man, it resounds for centuries; without history, the clamor of his
fame would be heard as little as the thunder of the artillery. Thus a common
man and a great one can write about the same matter, though they do not
write the same thing.15
[19]
That our ancestors accorded so much importance to the judgments of God
and valued the miraculous tests of innocence so greatly might be excused
because of their simplicity. Their age was cultivated enough not to heed
prophecies but not enough to see that their desire that God should allow
the innocent to walk over red-hot iron unscorched would be contrary to
his wisdom. This was reserved for our age. Today certain philosophers are
already beginning to make pretensions of believing it would be contrary to
God’s wisdom and greatness to concern himself at all with the world. [21]
I knew someone who thought of the days of the week as certain figures;
he once even drew Wednesday on the table. [. . .]
[24]
A young boy who was still perfectly innocent imagined that in a marriage
a man and a woman sit on a seesaw and move as children do: when one
goes up, the other goes down. He imagined this though he had never seen
[25]
a bride and groom on a seesaw.
Once we know our weaknesses, they cease to harm us.

[29]

I cannot help wondering why we strive for such painstaking precision in
our work and concern ourselves so much with deviations of more or less.
Anyone who repeats us will inevitably deviate by +x or –x from the actual
point. Ultimately it makes no difference whether the circle can be squared
or not, so what are we chattering about? Perhaps only so the angels do not
mock us?
[41]
Many things about our bodies would not seem to us so filthy and obscene
if we did not have the idea of nobility in our heads.
[45]

Notebook D

53

If I had not written this book, a thousand years from now, between six and
seven in the evening, people would in many towns in Germany be talking
about quite different things from what they will in fact be talking about.
[55]
I too am awakened, friend, and have attained that degree of philosophical
sobriety at which the love of truth is my only guide, and with the light
granted me meet all I regard as error without exclaiming I regard that as
[84]
error and even less that is error.
To undertake a comparison between what we think and what we say. We
may say without fear of flogging that half the population would be flogged
if they said openly what they think—and yet man is that which thinks,
not that which speaks. Two people complementing one another would clash
[89]
immediately if each knew what the other thought of him.
The thought still has too much play in the expression; I have pointed with
the knob of a stick where I should have pointed with the tip of a needle. [96]
How and in what form does this property show itself in similar and related
things?
[97]
A king decrees that under penalty of death people shall believe a stone to
be a diamond.
[99]
The inhabitants of Otaheite eat alone and cannot understand how one could
eat in company, especially with women. Surprised by this, Banks asked why
they eat alone: they do it because it is the right thing to do, but why it is
[130]
right they would not and could not say.16
To think all things to their conclusion so that not the slightest obscurity
remains, to discover its deficiencies through experiment, to improve or with
this purpose to suggest something more perfect—this is the sole means of
endowing ourselves with so-called common sense, which should be the
principal aim of our efforts. Without common sense, there can be no true
virtue. It alone makes the great author, scribendi recte sapere est et principium
et fons. We must only have the will, as the maxim of Helvétius says.17 [133]

54

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

What are the thoughts and ideas we have while awake if not dreams? If
while awake I think of friends who are dead, the story unfolds without it
occurring to me that they are dead—just as in a dream. Or I imagine that
I have won a grand lottery, and in that moment I really have won it; the
thought that I have not won it, I encounter only subsequently as proof
to the contrary. The actual possession of something sometimes gives us no
greater pleasure than merely imagining we possess it. Our dreams are made
benign if we avoid eating meat in the evening, but what about these other
thoughts?
[134]
To discover a thought such that anyone, upon hearing it, would laugh
themselves to death.
[137]
Like a great philosophical chatterer, he is concerned not so much with the
[153]
truth as with the sound of his prose.
In giving incomprehensible, nonsensical things a reasonable interpretation,
one arrives often at excellent thoughts; thus Jacob Böhme’s book might be
as useful to some as the book of nature.18
[159]
The infusion of man with life is, so to speak, the push that sets him in
motion, and constant friction brings him to rest. Herein originates the
inclination toward foolishness. Though thinking is as natural to man as
rumination is to oxen, he has now made an occupation of it. Goodness is
becoming difficult for man to attain.
[160]
Man is perhaps half spirit and half matter, as the polyp is half plant and
[161]
half animal. The strangest creatures lie always at the boundaries.
A philosopher on the island of Zezu once asked: if a man could transform
himself into an ox, would it be considered suicide, and would the ox be
culpable?
[165]
To the words that are simply tossed about certainly belong butter-bread,
philosophy, and mood.
[167]
To transform oneself into an ox is not yet suicide.

[169]

I no longer consort with others. As a man, I improve my thoughts as best
I can, and if they do not take flight, then it is to my detriment. But is it
my fault? That is another question.
[171]

Notebook D

55

We mock Jacob Böhme? As if the supernatural things of which he speaks
could sound natural. If the inhabitants of Mercury or the Sun recounted to
us in German their observations, gathered through the employment of other
senses, such a tale would sound no more reasonable. Do we not already
have in our own religion one times three equals one? [. . .] Perhaps Jacob
Böhme’s book, of which an angel would make the same judgment as we,
is sometimes nonsense and sometimes even sublime. [. . .]
[172]
We judge the mysterious actions of nature from similar actions we already
understand.
[174]
It seems that attraction in inanimate things is what self-love is in animate
things.
[178]
Code of Law: regard all things from the best vantage point; determine first
the true end, or what is in the general best interest, then the means; consider
multiple vantage points.
[183]
How far do the consequences extend?

[188]

Describe the library of a madhouse, together with the librarian’s commentaries
on the books, his disjointed speech, and his insightful remarks mingled with
nonsense.
[189]
God created man in his own image; I dare say this means we created God
[201]
in the image of man.
When I regard anything first as body then as mind, it produces a tremendous
parallax. The former might be called the somatocentric, and the latter, the
psychocentric aspect of a thing. Sarcocentric.
[202]
Nowadays we already have books about books and descriptions of
descriptions.
[204]
Is it possible to acquire more distinct knowledge of a certain substance than
that acquired by being the substance in question? We know little of our
souls, and we are our souls. To whom does it belong then to have more
knowledge of our souls than we ourselves have, and why does there remain
something there of which we are ignorant? This last fact, it seems to me,

56

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

is certain proof that we still serve purposes unknown to us. If the only
determination of our being is to be tickled or tormented by our surrounding
substances, I cannot understand why we remain unknown to ourselves.
[211]
We see with our two eyes only one image as long as the images are at an
equal distance and thus also form an image of equal size on the tunica
retina. In other cases, however, the image appears doubled: when I hold an
object near one eye and regard it with both, when the image does not fall
on similar parts of both eyes, or when the image falls upon similarly located
parts of the eyes but are not the complimentary points where the image
of a single thing is ordinarily formed. This is sufficient proof, it seems to
me, that we see two of everything; since, however, we notice no difference
between them, because of the similar positions of the images with respect to
our symmetrical body, we regard them as being one. The moment one image
is slightly enlarged, as when one regards an object with one naked eye and
regards the same object through a telescope with the other eye, everything
appears doubled. Perhaps our souls are similarly constituted, without our
sensations and perceptions appearing manifold. We sense something as a
unity or single thing not because we ourselves are a unity but because we
regard it in a unified way, in accordance with the attunement of our senses,
and thus as a unity or single thing. I am quite concerned, however, that
the idea of the simplicity of our soul is a borrowed concept. We cannot
sense for an individuum A, thus multiple substances cannot have a thought
in common. The ratio of equivalence (one might say regarding the eye
mentioned above) is perhaps in the soul = 0, just as it is in the addition
of ratios in arithmetic.
[212]
Ubiquity.

[236]

One distinguishes equally among all things.

[239]

One could create a dietetics for the health of the understanding.

[251]

Every person has their own sphere of knowledge in which they can orient
themselves better than most of our philosophers can in theirs. Within it, a
person notices in a glance what is ridiculous, subtle, stupid, or superfluous.
When I understand the purpose of something and have acquired familiarity
with the established methods, it should be easy for me to recognize error in

Notebook D

57

any new method—and how could it be otherwise? If I wished to describe
to a kitchen girl a new dish and were to tell her that it is an interesting
meal with an exceptional flavor and that some grain should be sprinkled on
the edge of the dish, she would certainly mock me. Many authors approach
their subject in this way without noticing its absurdity. If we wish to make
something comprehensible to other people, we must use examples drawn
from their own circle, and from this experience we may also learn what we
[252]
must do to make a certain science a part our own circle.
Have we not been resurrected once already? Certainly it was from a state
in which we knew less of the present than in the present we know of the
future. Our former state is related to our present as our present is related
to our future.
[254]
Brush your teeth and rinse your mouth every morning! This is more easily
adhered to when we must swear to it with our fingers on the cross. Our
[258]
inclination toward the mystical, it is exploited.
Given the correct concept of a thing’s perfection, we are certain to act in
accordance with the design of nature, whose ultimate purpose is to thrive
and flourish. This, I am convinced, is a universal law.
[260]
As we begin to consider something, it appears plausible, but upon further
consideration, we find it false. The initial impression of a thing on the
mind is important indeed. Surveying a thing, our mind sees all aspects
obscurely, which is often more advantageous than a distinct view of only
[273]
one aspect.
In the Bible it is said that God created man in his own image. Philosophers
do the opposite—they create God in their own image.
[274]
A proposition in geometry is sometimes only another in a different form.
[284]
One might call a globe an astronomical computing machine.

[288]

The moment I have asserted a proposition: where does one find more
examples?
[295]

58

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

From a single experiment with the reflection of a light beam, the
[299]
mathematician deduces the whole of catoptrics.
According to Alembert, the most excellent logical systems are of use only to
those who can dispense with them. With a telescope the blind see nothing.19
[300]
I imagine that when we reach the limits of things set for us, or even as
we only approach these limits, we gaze into the infinite, just as from the
[312]
surface of the earth we gaze out into immeasurable space.
Where a body is in motion, there is space and time; the simplest sentient
creature in this world would thus be the measure of times and angles. Our
hearing, and perhaps also our sight, consists already in the counting of
oscillations.
[314]
That men act always out of self-interest is useful for the philosopher to
know; yet he must not act in accordance with such a principle but conform
his actions to the customs of the world. Just as a discerning writer does
not depart from the common usage of words, so too should a good citizen
not readily deviate from customary actions, though he may have objections
to both. So convinced am I that man does everything in accordance with
his own self-interest (understanding this word properly), I believe it just as
indispensable to sustaining the world as sensibility is to sustaining the body.
It is sufficient that our own interests very often cannot be attained without
contributing to the joy of a thousand others and that our first cause so wisely
knew how to combine the interest of one with the interest of many. [321]
Our world will in time grow so judicious that it will be as ludicrous to
believe in God as it now is to believe in ghosts.
[329]
We should examine whether it is even possible to do anything without
having our own self-interest always in mind.
[350]
What is this? I can scarcely distinguish whether it is something or nothing.
Such arguments are best avoided. So that you see I mean this earnestly,
I want to help you. I want to give your arguments all the force you are
incapable of giving them—the force they would have if you were reasonable
people—and then I want to step back and blow them down.
[353]

Notebook D

59

Lambert’s color pyramid is a sensible image of abstraction; in the end only
white remains.20
[356]
Our best expressions will grow feeble; many words that were once vigorous
metaphors are now infirm. When one is stylistically venturesome, defying
imitation, this certainly aids the survival of a work so that it cannot so
[362]
easily grow old.
One can repeat something in a way that it has already been said, remove it
from human understanding, or draw it closer. The shallow mind does the
first; the enthusiast, the second; and the true philosopher, the third. [364]
There must be someone for whom the orbit of a comet does not seem as
long as it does for us.
[385]
Religion has brought about much evil, but should it therefore be rejected?
If so, the notorious belli taeterrima causa must for the same reason be
abolished.
[405]
The philosopher often defies the great men of this world with a thought;
the great man defies them and feels it.
[406]
In my opinion, this theory corresponds in psychology to a notable one in
physics that explains the northern lights as the phosphorescence of herrings.
[411]
I doubt it will ever be possible to prove we are the work of a supreme
being and not rather fabricated for its own amusement by a very imperfect
one.
[412]
The more we learn to discriminate in a language by the use of reason, the
more difficult it becomes to speak it. In fluent speech, much is instinctive
that cannot be achieved through reason. Certain things, it is said, must be
learned in youth, which is true of those who cultivate their reason to the
detriment of all other powers.
[413]
You must never think: this proposition is too difficult for me; it is only
for great scholars; I will concentrate on this other one instead. This is a
weakness that will degenerate easily into complete inactivity. You must not
think yourself too humble for anything.
[434]

60

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

To investigate how two things are related and how they behave in the
[446]
absence or presence of that common property.
If one investigates precisely the location, form, and order of everything
around us, one will discover natural reasons for their being in this location,
this form, or this order. Having verified these laws, whoever has undertaken
this investigation will discover through his own understanding simple
improvements for these things because he will find that these individual
laws are sometimes observed and sometimes disregarded.
[447]
Some wish to ridicule art historians, saying they merely write books
about trivial little paintings. What, however, are our conversations and
compositions, if not descriptions of images on our retinas or false images
in our minds?
[448]
If only someone like von Störk would stand up from among the philosophers
and show the value of bad critics; the truth is more often brought to light
by bad critics rather than good or by the oblique endeavors of idiots rather
than the focused endeavors of great minds.21
[449]
Observing most educated people, one finds they do nothing themselves
except cut their nails and quills. Their hair is styled by others, their clothes
made by others, their dishes prepared by others—all so they can observe
the weather in their own heads.
[450]
The man was such an intellectual he was of hardly any use in this world.
[451]
I know very well the people you mean; they are all mind and theory, all
head and not enough hand to sew on a button.
[452]
Helvétius’ system, according to which all men are born with equal abilities,
strikes a blow to physiognomy. Why among similar faces does one so often
find similar dispositions?
[454]
What science would mediate these two fields?

[457]

Rome, London, and Carthage are only durable clouds; all will alter and
finally perish. How often we regard as essentially different things that differ
only by plus and minus.
[461]

Notebook D

61

We have only one word for color and pigment, which causes a great deal of
confusion. This is often true where for many things we have only one word
but require more. Color is a concept, and pigment is a word. A combination
of concepts expressed in words can mean something different for different
people. We should, therefore, investigate whether more words might not be
created, and thus give some motivation to make further distinctions. Here
[464]
also is the root of disputes about the word beautiful.
Aside from the properties he shared with various animals, he also shared
some with thermometers, hygrometers, and barometers.
[465]
Metaphorical language is a form of natural language that we construct from
[468]
arbitrary but concrete words. This is why we find it so pleasing.
An animal is perhaps possible that cannot discern its own body, just as
our soul cannot clearly conceive of itself though it knows it is there. The
materialist finds one reason too weak with which one wishes to prove the
existence of the soul, and the idealist finds the other reason too weak. [470]
We have by now in our travel books so many observations of man that
we might, by a kind of synthesis, derive from them everything any further
books of travel are apt to discover.
[479]
Scholars should always gratefully avail themselves of new conjectures about
things, provided they are at all reasonable; another mind often needs nothing
more to stimulate it to make an important discovery. The prevailing way of
explaining a thing no longer has any effect on his brain and is no longer
able to set it in motion.
[484]
He had constructed for himself a certain system, which thereafter exercised
such an influence upon his manner of thinking that onlookers always saw
his judgment walking a few steps in front of his perceptions, though he
himself believed it followed.
[485]
Man has an inclination to promote the happiness of others, independent
of his self-interest. This sounds as though a professor of philosophy created
man—more charming than true.
[493]
If one is to read judiciously, one must keep two aims constantly in mind:
first to remember what is said and unite it with one’s own system of thought,

62

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

and second to appropriate for oneself how others have previously understood
the matter. Everyone should thus be warned against reading books by
dilettantes, particularly when they have included their own arguments and
demonstrations. One can indeed learn from their compilations, but they
cannot teach what for the philosopher is equally if not more important,
namely, how to bring appropriate form to one’s own manner of thinking.
[506]
Most of our expressions are metaphorical; they contain the philosophy of
[515]
our ancestors. [. . .]
Many know things in the way one knows the solution to a riddle after
reading it or being told of it. It is an impoverished kind of knowledge
and the kind least to be cultivated. One should rather cultivate the kind
of knowledge that enables one to discover for oneself, when needed, what
others must read or be told in order to know. Many simplicia. Here again
we arrive at a thought that has been thought before.22
[536]
To do exactly the opposite of something is also a form of imitation, namely,
an imitation of its opposite.
[604]
I offer this book to you not as a lorgnette to observe others but as a mirror
to observe yourself.
[617]
One cannot deny that the word nonsense, if spoken with the appropriate
nose and voice, concedes little or nothing, even to the words chaos and
eternity. One feels a shock, if my senses do not deceive me, which arises
from a fuga vacui of human understanding.23
[636]
Our discoveries might be regarded as things we simply lost or, so to speak,
misplaced in the mind. It is possible to find something there only if it was
previously lost.
[640]
Nobody has bad taste, but many have none at all. Most people have no
ideas, says Dr. Price; they speak about things, but they do not think. I have
often called this “having an opinion.”24
[645]
Body and soul: a horse harnessed to an ox.

[656]

Notebook D

63

In a quite remarkable passage of Herr Herder’s treatise on language, he asks
how vision and hearing, color and words, odor and tone are related. Not,
he writes, on their own in the objects. But what then are these properties
of objects? They are mere sensations in us and as such do not all intertwine.
We are a thinking sensorium commune but affected from various sides. Herein
lies the explanation. We abound in such combinations of diverse sensations,
but we do not notice them except in an agitated mood, in illness or fantasy,
or in situations where they become exceedingly apparent.25
[691]
Helvétius’ Discours I. Judgment is sensation. Differences in judgment depend
upon passion and ignorance; the side we see, we take to be the only one, or
we do not retain in memory those things we must know in order to judge
something properly. The misuse of words has led also the greatest men into
error. En effet s’il faut tirer tout le parti possible de l’observation, il faut ne
marcher qu’avec elle, s’arreter au moment qu’elle nous abondonne et avoir
le courage d’ignorer ce qu’on ne peut encore savoir.26
[705]
Our sensations and perceptions are the sum of many. [. . .]

[727]

That the colors of objects often appear so strange in a camera obscura shows
how much sensation is intertwined with judgment. If we merely sensed,
much that now does not stir us would appear quite intense, and much that
appears intense weak.
[739]
Regarding the interference of judgment in the estimation of colors, I believe
that to a man of keen senses a shadow on the face appears blue or black.
Another who judges in advance does not see this and takes the entire face
to be flesh colored. It is thus essential to investigate correctly and compare
what the senses show and to elucidate correctly and verify the image on
the retina before writing books about it.
[769]

Notebook E
1775–1776

Something might have been made from his ideas, had an angel arranged
them for him.
[9]
The path by which one arrives at knowledge of certain things makes a great
difference. If one begins in youth with metaphysics and religion, one may
easily follow a series of rational syllogisms that lead one to the immortality of
the soul. Not every other path will lead here, at least not so easily. Although
a definite concept may be given for each individual word, it is nonetheless
impossible for us to have in mind all these concepts with equal clarity in a
complex deduction. In the application we often combine them in the way
easiest and most familiar to us since youth.
[30]
Nothing is more difficult in philosophy than to take up an idea from
the beginning, and yet in considering it to make use of already acquired
knowledge: to think, for example, about the immortality of the soul without
already having in mind a certain end or purpose. Often we draw a conclusion
from the sixth inference, and then merely add to it the eighth, ninth, tenth,
and so forth. Is the reason we find it so difficult to reconcile ourselves as
material substances with ourselves as thinking things perhaps not because we
ourselves are nothing more than this thinking? The nearer we come to an
object in nature, the more incomprehensible it becomes; the grain of sand
is certainly not what I take it to be. It is as equally incomprehensible to me
how a complex being is capable of thought as how a simple and complex
one can be combined. Had we an analysis of such propositions and were
able to reduce them to a formula, we would see that both propositions are
equivalent and that the enigma had only been deferred but not resolved.

65

66

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

I do not know how far apart in my mind are the two propositions, two
times two is four and Henry IV was murdered by Ravaillac. Nor do I know
whether each occupies the whole brain or only a small part and whether
in all people the parts are the same. It seems to me probable that each
thought sets a certain region of the brain in motion and that this motion is
communicated to the rest of the brain, with greater strength in some than
in others, or that, not being completely communicated, it carries further
in one person than in another.
[31]
All languages have the expressions, I think, I feel, I breathe, I was struck, I
compare, I remember the color, and I remember the proposition. That in us
which remembers the color and that which remembers the proposition are
perhaps as little the same thing as that which is struck or which compares.
Everything has its effects on everything else; man feels complete in the
whole. And if I remember that (a+x) 3 (a–x) is equivalent to a2 – x2, perhaps
my thumb is responsible for some part, however obscure, but perhaps lively
enough in some that in touching something they might be reminded of it
or might believe, while dreaming or feverish, the proposition to be nothing
more than a piece of cloth. It is not as vexing to explain a phenomenon
using mechanics and a strong dose of vague concepts as to explain it entirely
through mechanics; that is to say, the docta ignorantia is less reprehensible
than the indocta. All motion in the world has its cause in something that
is not in motion; why, then, should the universal force not just as well be
the cause of my thoughts as it is of fermentation?
[32]
We must admit the man is right, but not according to the rules we have
by consensus imposed upon ourselves in this world.
[33]
In all intelligent people, one finds the inclination to express oneself succinctly,
to say expeditiously what needs to be said. Languages thus give no weak
indication of the character of a nation. How difficult it is to translate Tacitus
into German. The English, at least their talented authors, are already more
concise than we are. It is to their great advantage, in this respect, that they
possess particular words for a species while we are more oblique, using the
genus with a qualification. It could do no harm to count the words in every
phrase and endeavor always to express it with the fewest.27
[39]
Every condition of the soul has its own sign and expression as much as it
has an innocence that never becomes guilt; you see then how difficult it is
to seem original without being so.
[40]

Notebook E

67

Merchants and traders have a waste book (Sudelbuch, Klitterbuch in German
I believe) in which they enter daily everything they purchase and sell,
messily, without order. From this, it is transferred to their journal, where
everything appears more systematic, and finally to a ledger, in double entry
after the Italian manner of bookkeeping, where one settles accounts with
each man, once as debtor and then as creditor. This deserves to be imitated
by scholars. First it should be entered in a book in which I record everything
as I see it or as it is given to me in my thoughts; then it may be entered
in another book in which the material is more separated and ordered, and
the ledger might then contain, in an ordered expression, the connections
[46]
and explanations of the material that flow from it.
There is a great difference between still believing something and believing it
again. Still believing that the moon influences plants reveals stupidity and
superstition, but believing it again indicates philosophy and reflection. [52]
If it were true, what in the end would be gained? Nothing but another truth.
Is this of such great advantage? We have enough old truths still to digest,
and even these we would not be able to endure if we did not sometimes
flavor them with lies.
[59]
What? One should understand the matter if one wishes to debate it? I
say it is essential to a debate that at least one party not understand the
issue under discussion and that in so-called current debates, in their most
perfect form, neither party understands the issue—indeed, they need not
[72]
even understand what they themselves are saying. [. . .]
I have no idea what the man means. He has got it into his head that certain
words have certain meanings that they must always retain. Is this a royal
decree? Who will prevent me from taking here a word and there a meaning
and combining them? Obviously this is a lack of contact with the wider
world, which is the only world there is.
[85]
The unfathomable and fathomable depths of philosophy. He understood
the profundity of this science in all its superficiality.
[102]
On the advance of the equinox and the dinner hour: the investigation of
the latter is as important to the moralist as the investigation of the former
is to the astronomer.
[117]

68

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

Once people have gotten such ideas into their heads, they are not so easily
removed. The best thing they can do is take a sound system of logic and go
through their entire system of beliefs piece by piece until they have cleaned
it up. [. . .]
[137]
Stop your chattering. What do you want? If the stars are no longer fixed
in their places, how can you continue to say that truth is still truth? [139]
I actually went to England to learn to write German.

[144]

If one considers the matter, better yet, even if one merely speaks about it,
one must acknowledge it.
[145]
One of the most fruitful means of discovery, rivaled not even by the
questions quid, quis, ubi, is when upon hearing something one asks, is this
true? and searches for reasons for one’s answer. The dictum that one should
never speak or write before thinking reveals the good will of its author but
no genuine reflection; to express myself provincially but forcefully, the good
man did not consider that you cannot obey this law without breaking it.
Indeed, many would not be able to speak at all; thus I believe exactly the
opposite. Many people have said something brilliant out of desperation,
having to defend something without previous consideration, and to venture
claims is to do philosophy. [. . .]
[146]
Truth must overcome a thousand obstacles to safely reach the page and
a thousand more to travel back from the page to the mind. Liars are its
most feeble enemies. The enthusiastic writer who speaks of everything and
views everything as other honest people do who have had one drink too
many; the sophisticated, pretentious student of human nature, who sees and
intends to see his whole life reflected in every human action like angels in
a monad; the worthy, pious man who believes everything out of respect,
examines nothing he learned before the age of fifteen, and builds the little
that he has examined upon unexamined ground—these are the enemies of
truth.
[196]
A shot of reason.

[202]

If mankind suddenly became virtuous, thousands would starve.

[213]

Notebook E

69

A book is a mirror: if an ape looks into it, an apostle is unlikely to look
out. We have no words for speaking about wisdom to idiots. Whoever
understands the wise is wise already.
[215]
There is no art in saying something briefly when, like Tacitus, one has
something to say. When one has nothing to say, however, and yet writes
a book and makes truth, with its ex nihilo nihil fit, into a liar—that I call
an accomplishment.28
[222]
As I take up my quill, I feel myself so full, so equal to my subject, and see
my book so clearly before me in nuce, I would almost venture to express
it with a single word.
[224]
The man who believes a compendium is a book or to record facts is to
write history.
[232]
That it is true does not matter, as long as the people believe it—that is the
[248]
devil.
He cannot even distinguish between active and passive reading.

[266]

Do not deride our metaphors; after the strong fabric of a language begins
to fade, they are the only way to revive it and to lend the whole life
and warmth. It is incredible how much our best words have lost: the
word reasonable has almost entirely lost its impressiveness; we understand
its meaning but no longer feel it because so many men have been called
reasonable. Unreasonable is in its own way more impressive. A reasonable
child is a dopey, pious, good for nothing tattler; an unreasonable child is
[274]
much better. The sound of Liberty.
A dangerous consequence of all too profuse reading is that it exhausts the
meaning of words, and thoughts are only approximately expressed. The
expression fits the thought only loosely. Is this true?
[276]
Fools would be better than our finest philosophers because they still believe
what they see and sense, while certain English philosophers, turning their
backs on nature, believe what they do not sense or perceive. Yet I am far
from ridiculing this; I believe denying one’s senses is a daring flight of

70

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

reason, while speech, suicide, and insanity are merely the hops of a flea.
This I call freedom; indeed, such enterprising souls need not return to the
barracks of the earth in order to eat and drink; they have deserted the love
of God entirely and live like the devil apart.
[282]
There are people who believe everything done with a solemn face is
[286]
reasonable.
Not true—neither tomorrow nor in eternity.

[290]

Is that a sin? As little as breaking a window or stealing apples.

[297]

His writing astonishes even the minds of angels.

[310]

A good expression is as valuable as a good idea because it is nearly impossible
to express oneself well without casting a favorable light on what is expressed.
[324]
Whether something like this actually occurs in nature, I have no idea, nor
does it concern me; that it occurs in books and cannot be refuted or that
it can be found in the respected journals is enough.
[329]
I was acquainted with a few astronomers in England who altered their
findings, and they were right in doing so. Should one not lend nature
a hand sometimes? I do not see why not. If in wishing to connect two
uncooperative propositions, I push one of them a little, what is wrong with
this? People who reason this way have always the truth in view. Is a system
of no importance then? The truth is not impoverished when I make of a 3 a
2, but my entire system may collapse. This is why I always enjoy it when I
read from our best writers in physics the brave philosophical statement that
the experiment they employed for proving some proposition was successful
beyond expectation. There is something here that is more easily felt than
expressed. I cannot comprehend how people could ridicule this. It brings
tears of joy to my eyes.
[331]
Once we thoroughly understand
experiment is nothing more than
a ceremony. We know in advance
for her consent as great rulers ask

nature, even a child will see that an
a compliment we pay her. It is merely
what her answer will be. We ask nature
their provincial representatives. [332]

Notebook E

71

I am really not joking, my dear countrymen, when I confess Germans have
no esprit, for the little bit of atheism found among us cannot be called esprit.
A French atheist with esprit is expected to be converted only when he is
severely ill and on his deathbed, while ours are usually converted every time
there is a thunderstorm. Nor are the little songs of our youth evidence that
our youth possess esprit.—True, esprit is nonsense, but not all nonsense is
[342]
esprit.
The obscure sense of his own perfectibility makes man think he is still far
from his goal, even when he has attained it and reason is not luminous
enough for him. What he finds easy, he thinks poorly of, and thus he strains
from bad to good and from good to a kind of bad he considers better than
good. Good taste is either what agrees with my own or what submits itself
to the rule reason. From this we see how appropriate it is to employ reason
in seeking the laws of taste.
[359]
The egoists and the idealists might be ridiculed in my letters on contemporary
literature: the common sense of one steward opposed to the philosophy of
the other.
[371]
When we see something, we endeavor with words to express without
distortion the impression it has made upon us. It is incredible how clever
humans are.
[384]
“How’s it going?” a blind man asked a crippled man. “As you see,” replied
the crippled man.
[385]
Nonsense and confusion should beset whoever says such a thing!

[388]

Pity and fear Aristotle considers the purpose of tragedy, not pity and horror.
[399]
Φιλοσοφωτερον και σπουδαιωτερον ποιησις ἱστοριας ἐστιν.29

[405]

We should leave the metaphysical musing to those who can do no better.
Without departing the parish of Beattie’s philosophy, one can say and do
much that is good and useful, much more than if one loses oneself in fine
subtleties. His philosophy is for the people, the other for professors—the
analysis of sensation.30
[411]

72

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

Do not have overly artificial ideas about people, but judge them naturally
[412]
and hold them neither for too good nor for too evil.
Overly subtle men are rarely great men, and their investigations are often
as useless as they are precise. They distance themselves further and further
from practical life when they should come closer to it. Just as the dancing
or fencing instructor does not begin with the anatomy of the legs and
hands, so a sound and useful philosophy can begin much higher than with
such subtle musings. The foot must be positioned in this way, or you will
fall down; you must believe this, for it would be absurd not to—these are
very good foundations. People who wish to go further may do so, but they
must not think that they are thereby doing something great, for when they
are successful they discover only what the reasonable man has long known.
Someone who once again proves Euclid’s twelfth axiom deserves at most
to be called an ingenious man, but he will make no contribution to the
expansion of the limits of science that he could not have made without this
discovery. And the skeptic? You will never succeed in refuting the skeptic.
For what possible argument could be given to convince someone who would
believe absurdities? And indeed does everyone who wishes to be refuted
really deserve to be? Even the greatest fighters do not fight everyone who
challenges them. These are the reasons Beattie’s philosophy deserves respect;
it is not an entirely new philosophy, but it begins at a higher level. It is
the philosophy not of the professor, but of man.
[418]
Our philosophers listen too seldom to the voice of feeling; or rather, they
rarely possess sufficient sensitivity, so that to every event in the world they
respond by expressing more what they know than what they feel, which is
useless. It brings us not one step nearer to true philosophy. Is what a man
can know necessarily what he should know?
[423]
The enthusiasts whom I have known all had the appalling fault that when
the smallest spark fell upon them they burst into flames like long primed
fireworks, always in the same pattern and with the same clamor; but in
the reasonable man, feeling and sensation are always proportionate to the
impression. The foolish man argues coldly from the first impression, while the
sensible man occasionally turns around to hear what instinct has to say. [427]
Because we do not read each syllable but entire words, many books could
be abridged. Vowels in many words are superfluous: everyone certainly reads
prsn as person; evryn crtnly rds as prsn.
[434]

Notebook E

73

Perhaps within our brains there are other instruments that might be called
eyes, ears, and so forth. When moved, aether transmits its motion to the
nerves of the retina, whereupon it is no longer aether that is moved but
nerve fluid. The latter occurs in the world that I am, while the former
occurs in a world that I am not.
[452]
Dr. Priestley twice expresses himself forcefully regarding Hartley’s Observations
on Man: 1) The preface to the refutation of Reid, “For my own part I can
almost say that I think myself more indebted to this one treatise than to all
the books I ever read besides, the scriptures excepted.” And in the same work,
when he speaks of knowledge of oneself: “Something was done in this field
of knowledge by Descartes, very much by Mr. Locke, but most of all by Dr.
Hartely who has thrown more useful light upon the theory of the mind than
Newton did upon the theory of the natural world.”31
[453]
We should follow our feelings and express in words the first impression a
thing makes upon us. I say this not because I wish to save the truth in
this manner but because it is the unadulterated voice of our experience,
the result of our best observations, and because we too easily fall into
compulsory chatter if we first reflect. In this respect, I advise one read
Beattie’s philosophy.
[454]
The English are more attentive to sensation than others, which is why
they are so inclined to posit novel senses: the sense of truth, of beauty, of
morality. [. . .]
[456]
A principal rule in philosophy is to create no deus ex machina, to assume
no sense or instinct where one can still make do with association and
mechanism.
[460]
People who have read a great deal seldom make great discoveries. I do not
say this to excuse laziness, for discovery requires extensive introspection and
observation of things. One must see for oneself more than let oneself be
told. Association.
[467]
My observation that in the position of sand on a charged plate one may
discern the forces that acted thereupon might be of use in the explanation
of vibrations in Hartley’s system of association. What is the form of the
earth and its landscape if not a tablet from which one may read all forces
that acted thereupon? Herr Lesage’s theory that every point might be an

74

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

intermediary one is as equally universal in its explanation of movement in
the physical world as Hartley’s associationism is in its explanation of the
actions and emotions of man.32
[469]
We use the word soul as the algebraists might use x, y, z or one might use
the word attraction; it is perhaps merely a word like opinion, condition.
[472]
Newton might have used x or * instead of attraction.
Just as we express heat, cold, and force with lines, we might also call acts
brilliant or dark. It would be absurd to say a grey or sky-blue act. Much
might be expressed with visible ideas.
[473]
To investigate how, according to Hartley’s theory, my strange notion of
metempsychosis could originate.
[474]
A person’s actions and the appearance of his household are commonly an
extension of the inner constitution of his brain, just as a magnet imparts
form and order to iron fillings.
[476]
In Germany sewing needles hear, and in England they see.

[477]

I do not use the word devil, which occurs frequently in my work, in the
sense in which ordinary people would but like recent philosophers, in order
to keep peace among all sects. It is comparable to the x, y, z of the algebraists
or to an unknown quantity.
[485]
In his essay on moral feeling in the Deutsche Museum, Herr Feder writes
that aside from authority, or the consequences of an action, we have no
basis for deciding whether an act is good or not. Approval or disapproval
that does not arise from such reasons rests on the association of ideas, habit,
mere physical inclination or disinclination of temperament, or something
else that alone is inadequate to characterize moral good and evil.33 [487]
If people recounted their dreams honestly, their character might be read
more easily from these than from the face.
[494]
I have often noticed when people learn to understand a mathematical
proposition from a perspective different from that of the usual demonstration,

Notebook E

75

they often say, “Oh, I see, it has to be that way.” This is an indication they
[496]
have understood it in their own system of thought.
The utility of systems consists not only in allowing us to think about
matters in an ordered way in accordance with a particular scheme but
also in allowing us to think about the matter at all; the latter utility is
incontestably greater than the former.
[497]
What I do not like about our definitions of genius is that there is in them
nothing of the judgment day, nothing of resounding through eternity, and
nothing of the footsteps of the almighty.
[505]
It is an admirable observation by Herr Hartley that false judgments are
corrected through differences between languages. For we think in words. It
deserves to be considered to what extent the acquisition of foreign languages
clarifies the concepts in our own language—an excellent question.34 [507]
“The proper method of philosophizing seems to be, to discover and establish
the general laws of action affecting the subject under consideration from
certain select, well defined and well attested phaenomena and then to explain
and predict the other phaenomena by these laws. This is the method of
analysis and synthesis recommended by Sir Isaac Newton.”—Hartley [508]
What effect must it have upon a people if it learns no foreign languages?
Presumably an effect similar to what a complete withdrawal from all society
has on an individual.
[510]
A on his lips and not-A in his heart.

[514]

In metaphysical demonstrations of the existence of God, it would perhaps
be best to avoid the word infinite entirely, or at least not to use it until we
are clear about the matter.
[518]

Notebook F
1776–1779

In a review, published in the Göttinger gelehrte Zeitung (1776), of the
recent Priestley edition of Hartley’s theory, he is rebuked for having failed
in his third essay to distinguish general and abstract ideas from ideas of
reflection. Locke claims along with many ancients that not all concepts
may be explained on the basis of effects of external objects upon outer
sense; that certain representations arise from the soul turning upon itself
(reflection) or, as one might now say, from the agitation, not occasioned by
an external object, of the innermost organs of our brain; thus for these ideas
of reflection, a second source must be posited, namely, inner sense or feeling.
Among these representations, which may be attributed neither to external
objects nor to their impressions upon our outer senses, he rightly counts all
of man’s concepts of the soul, its powers and effects, will, freedom, inclination
and disinclination, and so forth. These concepts arising from inner sense
are not, however, in Locke identical with universal or general concepts, nor
does he claim that all abstract concepts arise only from inner sense.—Finally
it concludes: Hartley is always a man deserving of study because in all of
his clamoring he has made many new and excellent discoveries that are
easily separated from the hypotheses by which he endeavors to support
them.35
[11]
The expression “I will not forget this for all eternity” is false.

[15]

When one begins to see all in all, one usually expresses oneself obscurely.
One begins to speak with the tongue of angels. [. . .]
[48]
In most cases, it is more difficult to make clever people believe you are what
you are not than really to become what you wish to appear to be. [51]
77

78

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

The welfare of many nations is decided according to the majority of votes,
though everyone admits there are more evil men than good.
[52]
We, the tail of the world, have no idea what the head is planning.

[54]

Bon sens. Menschen-Verstand, common sense is too often regarded as a perfect
sense when in fact it is nothing more than an ever vigilant and intuitive
[56]
knowledge of the truth of useful general propositions.
In the whole of philosophy, there is perhaps nothing more demanding of
discernment than to see clearly all difficulties involved with parallels. [68]
[. . .] What does firmness of flesh have to do with firmness of character?
[75]
To coordinate again the distinct concepts with clear ones.

[77]

They sneezed, hissed, coughed, and made two other kinds of sound for
[87]
which we have no words in German.
On the use of metaphors: when we employ an old word, it often follows
the channel dug in our understanding by the alphabet book; metaphors dig
a new one and often break through entirely.
[116]
I have remarked already elsewhere that everything in the world loses itself
in everything else and everything can be found in everything. I mean,
everything we designate with a word existed already before it reached that
degree at which we notice it. An example of this is a storm in which all
clouds are one and can be differentiated only by degree. [. . .]
[147]
A single soul was not enough for his body; he could have given two enough
to do.
[189]
In those days, they say, even some angels might have become Wolffians.
[252]
Perhaps a dog, just before it falls asleep, or a drunken elephant has ideas not
unworthy of a master of philosophy. But such ideas are of no use to them
and are soon extinguished by their all too sensitive sensual apparatus. [265]

Notebook F

79

Experience, not reading or hearing, is important. It is not all the same
whether an idea enters the soul through the eye or through the ear. [288]
The principium indiscernibilium may be expanded: nothing remains the same
even for two seconds; everything changes at every moment.36
[307]
Long before we were able to explain ordinary phenomena in the physical
world, we explained them by means of spirits. Now that we better understand
their relationship, we explain one phenomenon in terms of another; but two
sprits we retain, a God and a soul. The soul is now, as it were, a ghost that
haunts the fragile shell of our body. But does this accord even with our
limited reason? Must that which in our opinion cannot be caused by things
we know be caused by things other than those we know? This is not only a
false but a coarse line of reasoning. I am quite convinced we know precisely
nothing of that which we comprehend conceptually; and how much more
may there not remain that the fibers of our brain cannot represent? It
most becomes us to observe modesty and caution in philosophy and
especially psychology. What is matter according to the psychologist? Perhaps
there is nothing of the sort in nature; he kills matter and afterwards
[324]
says it is dead.
Leibniz defended the Christian religion, but to conclude straightaway from
this that he was a good Christian, as the theologians do, shows very little
knowledge of the world. Vanity and the desire to say things better than the
professionals are, in the case of such a man as Leibniz, who held firmly to
few principles, much more likely motivations for doing such a thing than
religion would be. If we search more deeply into our own heart, we will
discover how little we can assert of others. I would even dare say that I could
demonstrate that often we believe we believe something and yet we do not
believe it. Nothing is more unfathomable than the system of motivations
behind our actions.37
[348]
If the soul is simple, why is the constitution of the brain so complex? The
body is a machine and thus must be composed of mechanical parts. That
the mechanical in us extends quite far is proven by the fact that even the
internal parts of the brain are formed with a design about which we probably
do not understand even a hundredth part.
[349]
The metaphor is far more clever than its author, as are many things.
Everything has its depths. Whoever has eyes sees all in everything. [369]

80

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

Just as a deaf-mute can learn languages and how to read, so too can we do
things whose effects we cannot know and fulfill intentions of which we are
ignorant. He is a testament to a sense that he himself does not possess. [373]
The author gives the metaphor its body, but the reader gives it its soul.
[. . .]
[375]
Nature and lifestyle are more than twofold.

[391]

Every moment we do things of which we are unaware, and this ability
continues to grow; in the end, man will do everything without knowing it
and will literally become a rational animal. Reason approaches animality.
[424]
Our psychology will eventually settle on a subtle materialism as we learn ever
more about one side (matter) and on the other side have reached beyond
everything.
[425]
Thinking for oneself is often recommended while studying only for the
purpose of distinguishing between truth and the errors of others. It is useful,
but is that all? Is reading then studying? We could spare ourselves much
unnecessary reading. It has been said with great truth that while printing
certainly propagated learning, it also reduced its content. Much reading is
harmful to thinking. Among all the scholars I have known, the greatest
thinkers I have known are those who had read the least. Is enjoyment of
the senses nothing at all then?
[439]
When we teach men how they should think and not always what they should
think, we avoid much misunderstanding. It is a kind of initiation into the
mysteries of mankind. Whoever stumbles upon a peculiar proposition in his
own thinking will readily depart with it if it is false. A peculiar proposition
taught by a respected man, however, may mislead thousands who do
not examine it. One cannot be cautious enough in disclosing one’s own
opinions in matters of life and felicity and not diligent enough in inculcating
understanding and doubt. To this belongs Bolingbroke’s statement, “Every
man’s reason is every man’s oracle.”38
[441]
Doubt must be no more than vigilance; otherwise it can become dangerous.
[447]

Notebook F

81

One finds in language traces of all sciences, just as one finds in language
much that may be of use to the sciences.
[474]
Everything is equal to itself; a part represents the whole. I have at times
seen my entire life in an hour.
[478]
That what you are searching for is usually in the last pocket you search is
a putative empirical proposition, which I believe is assumed true in every
land and every family; and yet nobody seriously believes it.
[480]
With the simple proverbs of our ancestors, what use to me are the nests of
[487]
departed truths?
Man becomes sophistical and overly subtle where grounded knowledge is no
longer possible; consequently, everyone must become so when it concerns
the immortality of the soul and life after death. Here we are all without
ground. Materialism is the asymptote of psychology.
[489]
With our fashionable poets, one readily sees how the word produced the
thought; with Milton and Shakespeare, the thought always begets the word.
[496]
It is as if our languages have become confused: when we want an idea, they
bring us a word; when we call for a word, they give us a dash; and when
we expect a dash, there stands an obscenity.
[503]
Man has an irresistible instinct to believe he is not seen when he himself
sees nothing, like children who shut their eyes in order not to be seen. [512]
If physiognomy becomes what Lavater expects it to become, children will
be hanged before they have committed the deeds deserving of the gallows; a
new kind of confirmation will thus be performed each year, a physiognomical
auto de fe.
[521]
A clever child raised with a foolish one can itself become foolish. Man is so
perfectible and corruptible that he can become a fool through reason. [536]
Representations too are a life and a world.

[542]

82

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

It is a question whether a man might be raised in such a way that without
actually loosing his mind he would combine his concepts so idiosyncratically
[549]
that he would be of no use in society—an artificial fool.
Not the lies, but the very subtle false observations obstruct the illumination
of truth.
[552]
I have observed quite clearly that I am often of one opinion while lying
down and of another while standing, especially when I have eaten little and
[557]
am weary.
We continue to speak of the soul, just as we continue to say taler long after
[575]
the minting of talers has ceased.
In past times, when the soul was still immortal.

[576]

All impartiality is artificial. Man is always partial and is quite right to be.
Even impartiality is partial. He belonged to the party of the impartial. [578]
That will outlive even the German language.

[579]

Where the eye sees unclearly [. . .], it is already a kind of death; where
[582]
there is no clear image, there is no representation or idea.
What we are able to judge with feeling is very little and very simple; all
else is prejudice and complaisance.
[584]
The opinion of peoples who believed the world to be round, but also
believed we move on its concave side like oxen in a furrow, deserves to be
noted.
[596]
There are enthusiasts and fanatics without ability, and they are really
dangerous people.
[598]
God must punish, according to Christ’s parable, not because of his justness,
but because our nature demands it. Enthusiasm is merely a power. [599]
That some, at least me, often dream they are speaking of the dead with the
dead one of whom they are speaking might be the result of the similarity

Notebook F

83

of the hemispheres of our brain, just as we see double when we press on
one eye. In dreams we are fools; the scepter is missing. I have often even
dreamed of eating cooked human flesh. To understand the nature of the
soul from dreams is a matter worthy of the greatest psychologist. [607]
We are all leaves on a tree, and none is similar to another; one is symmetrical,
while the other is not, and yet all are equally important to the whole. This
[630]
allegory might be elaborated.
A defense and forceful discussion of the advantages conferred by our
ignorance: I believe a perfect physiognomy will eventually lead where
demonstrations by analogy already lead: all is good. But human physiognomy
will hardly get us there as quickly. To explain the origin of evil in the
world, it is useless to gather examples of retribution from here and there;
such things cannot be understood from within our horizon—even if we
were attentive and more perspicuous, we would still find just as much
evidence to the contrary. For the common man who cannot think, it is
useful for representing deeper raisonnement. I believe, however, that if we
had the whole before us, like a pocket watch, such insight would lead us
there. Imperfect is a word like sex or genus. Imperfection, like color, is not
in the object but in us. I believe where we glimpse perfection in the work
of the creator, we are still very far behind. The veil that covers the soul of
our neighbors, just as the veil that covers our fate, we must not endeavor
to lift—all efforts will be in vain.
[637]
We must not believe if we make a few discoveries here and there that things
will go on like this forever. An acrobat may leap higher than a plowboy,
and one acrobat may leap higher than another, yet the height over which
no human can leap is still very low. Just as we find water when we dig in
the earth, sooner or later we discover the incomprehensible everywhere. Man
may grasp a root fiber of the whole of science, yet he does not know if the
root belongs to a moss or a cedar. The astronomer Kindermann believed
he had discovered a telescope with which to see around the earth and even
had it engraved in copper.39
[645]
We cannot judge a face in an instant; something must be implied by it.
[651]
There is a kind of transcendental ventriloquism by which people can be
made to believe that something said on earth comes from heaven. [665]

84

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

Even superstition may be of use. We do not readily point an unloaded pistol
at another man and pull the trigger, because we believe that even with an
[681]
unloaded pistol the devil may still play his games.
Just as assimilation evokes syllables and words, the syllables in proper names
may add color to the images and traits to the characters in our imagination.
It is worth investigating whence the images arise that we form of people
whom we have never seen before. The double e in the name General Lee
contributes more to the image I have of his face than the stories I have
heard of his bad deeds.40
[683]
A philosophical dream book could be written. People have, as usual, made
the interpretations of dreams suffer their precocious zeal, which actually
should have been turned only against dream books. I know from undeniable
experience that dreams lead to self-knowledge. Sensation not interpreted by
reason is much stronger. This is demonstrated by the fact that a roaring
noise in our ears during sleep is found to be quite faint upon awaking. The
power of this separation of faculties in our brains is indicated by the fact that
as soon as reason lays down its scepter I recurrently dream of my mother
and see her in everything. It is strange also that we sometimes dream of
the streets of our home town and see particular houses that strike us, but
we quickly come to our senses and discover—whether true or not—that
things were only this way in the past.
[684]
Our thoughts would follow an entirely different course if things other than
reflection were not at work within us. Every man would have a different
morality and a different face. Perhaps something may be admitted here of
the influence a single word of mine might have on everything that will ever
be spoken.
[727]
I once again commend dreams. In dreams we live and perceive no less than
while awake, and one is just as important as the other. It is among the
virtues of man that he dreams and knows it. But we have yet scarcely made
best use of this. The dream is a life which, combined with our remaining
life, constitutes what we call human life. Our dreaming merges gradually
into our waking life so that we cannot tell where waking life begins. [743]
It is as easy to dream without sleeping as to sleep without dreaming. [749]

Notebook F

85

In the matter of seeing without light, it is remarkable that what we see
when we close our eyes in the dark may become the beginnings of dreams,
but the consequences are much different depending on whether we remain
in possession of our waking reason or we sleep. I would like to know if
animals are stupider when they dream than when they are awake; if so,
animals possess a degree of reason.
[752]
We each see not only a different rainbow but also a different object and a
[760]
different proposition than others do.
I believe it is far better to draw from oneself than from Plato. We can
misunderstand Plato, but we are always near enough to ourselves to lighten
[761]
all that is difficult and illuminate all that is obscure.
One can imagine cities one has never seen.

[763]

If reason, the daughter of heaven, were allowed to be the judge of beauty,
[765]
only illness would be ugly.
It is not surprising when one sees that the people who judge the contents
of the soul from the face commonly judge the thought from the sound of
the prose in which it is shrouded.
[773]
There are people who cannot endure the sight of blood, and some who
cannot endure the sight of daggers, and others itch when someone mentions
lice.
[779]
That the earth revolves around the sun and that when I sharpen a quill the
point of it flies off into my eye is all one law.
[787]
As long as someone looks into eternity and reads from the stars things I do
not see, I remain silent; because he would have to believe me if I were to
read off my prophecies. It is only when we look into such a world that in a
difference of opinion only one can be right or both wrong. We have all taken
an oath to the four syllogisms and sworn to the supremacy of logic. [790]
Not only can we make things transcend the material world, but also we
can make things in the spiritual world retro-transcend back to the material
world.
[791]

86

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

You cannot even infer from the constitution of one part of the body the
constitution of another part, and yet you wish to infer from the body
[806]
something of the soul.
This incomprehensible being that we are, and that would appear yet more
incomprehensible to us if we were to come even nearer to it, we must not
expect to find inscribed on the face.
[816]
People do not like to take ticket no. 1 in a lottery. “Take it,” reason cries
loudly. “It can win the twelve thousand talers just as well as any other.” “Don’t
take it for the world,” some je ne sais quoi whispers. “Such a small number has
never been associated with such great winnings”—and no one takes it. [829]
In a machine as complex as this world, it seems to me that in spite of the
small contributions we make, we are, as far as the essentials are concerned,
always gamblers in a lottery.
[846]
Why is there not a single creature that thinks and is as independent from
eating and drinking as a stone? Ghosts would be veritable islands. [851]
To think this causes such confusion in my head, almost as though I tried
to think that Poland lies to the west of us.
[856]
If the notion that the soul creates the body were as true as the popular
expression that each of us determines his own fortune, then the former
would amount to nothing more in physiognomy than the latter does in
soothsaying. Without revelation, we will never know the little God who
created this little world.
[862]
That men so often make false judgments is certainly not due solely to a lack
of insight and ideas but primarily to the fact that they do not put every
element of the proposition under the microscope and examine it. [864]
Thousands can see that a proposition is nonsense without possessing the
capacity to refute it formally.
[868]
Sometimes we make in the morning a statement that remains with us the
rest of the day. On February 28, 1778, I said nearly once every quarter of
an hour: Law is a bottomless pit.
[877]

Notebook F
New glimpses through old holes.

87

[879]

The analogy with dice might be of great use: I can predict the roll of a die
given the height from which it falls, but I cannot do the opposite. It is a
hypothesis. (Explained by other hypotheses.)
[888]
Someone who interprets all vague mockeries as references to himself and
[913]
believes people had him secretly in mind.
We can say a name for the understanding and then merely for the ear:
Haller, for example, once as a two-syllable word and then as the name of
[915]
an important scholar.41
What is the good of drawing conclusions from experience? I do not deny
they are sometimes correct, but are they not just as often incorrect? Is that
not what I intended to say? A game of chance.
[947]
Certainly we would and must admit that the ideal of strength and virtue is
the highest beauty. Yet it may be in conflict with the satisfaction of sensual
desires, which also plays a part. We love ourselves in others, and where we
recognize virtue in a face, it pleases us. Is this, however, beauty? People often
call what pleases them beautiful, but what pleases them is relative. [948]
The beauty of outer forms in general, says Mendelssohn in his Main
Principles of the Fine Arts, is only a small part of the purposes of nature,
and at times nature must neglect it for more important purposes.42 [960]
Our sensibility and feeling are certainly not the measure of the beauty of
the unfathomable designs of nature.
[961]
An ass was obliged to carry an image of Isis, and when the people kneeled
to worship the image, he thought they were honoring him.
[967]
Not at all is from a human point of view always only very little. Not at all
belongs only to the angels, and very little belongs to man.
[983]
When we were still a half-year younger, everything was completely different.
[997]

88

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

The author of the essays, whose name has been omitted by mankind. [1007]
The flash of conviction lit up everywhere.

[1008]

The devil could play his game, and the people might believe it if they repeat
it often enough.
[1012]
Certain audacious people have claimed that just as there are no mice where
there is no cat, so no one is possessed where there are no exorcists. [1030]
How perfectible man is and how necessary education can be seen from the
fact that he now appropriates in sixty years a culture that the whole race
has taken five thousand years to create. A youth of eighteen can contain
within himself the wisdom of whole ages. If I learn the proposition, the
force that attracts in polished amber is the same as that which thunders in the
clouds, I have learned something quite quickly, the discovery of which cost
[1039]
mankind several thousand years.
First there is a time when we believe everything without reasons; then for
a short time we believe with discrimination; then we believe nothing at all;
and then we believe everything again and indeed give reasons for believing
everything. [. . .]
[1042]
Once we know that someone is blind, we believe we can recognize this
from behind.
[1043]
We cannot prove the planets are inhabited by rational creatures, yet I
nevertheless believe it. Thus anyone can believe the soul dies with the body,
[1045]
even though he cannot strictly prove it.
You have discovered these traits together ten times, but have you also
counted the cases in which you have not found them together?
[1062]
An amusing thought: a scholar weeping because he cannot understand his
own writings. [. . .]
[1065]
When something bites us in the dark, we can usually locate the spot with
the point of a needle. What an exact plan the soul must have of its body.
[1084]

Notebook F

89

I have long known, dear sir, that here and everywhere observations must
be our primary concern and that a profound theory always allows enough
room for two heads of equal size to distance themselves nearly to the point
of being pro and contra. Only I assumed we are consistent, and what you
have taken to be mere theory was a probable explanation of my numerous
errors.
[1088]
We can count seconds and at the same time quite comfortably think of
something else. And if we know how to think of the days of the week in
images, we can calculate dates a rather long time in advance while we are
[1097]
counting; we can, in a word, count two things at once.
There are few people who are not obliged to believe many things that
upon closer examination they would not understand. They do this
simply on the authority of others, or they think they lack the additional
knowledge necessary to abolish all doubt. In this regard, it is possible for a
proposition, whose truth has not yet been verified, to be universally believed.
[1127]
An excellent analogy made by Priestley in On Matter and Spirit: “There is
no more reason in nature why perception may not belong to a system of
matter, as such, and not to the component parts of it, than that life should
be the property of an entire animal system and not of the separate parts
of it.”43
[1130]
If we followed our imagination without reason in our judgments, then in
subtracting one hundred from one thousand there would scarcely be one
[1160]
hundred left over.
That people who read so astonishingly much are often such bad thinkers
may also have its origin in the constitution of our brain. It is certainly not
all the same whether I learn a proposition without effort or if I finally arrive
at it myself through my own system of thought. In the latter everything
has its roots; in the former it is merely superficial.
[1171]
That we see ourselves in dreams can be attributed to our having seen
ourselves in the mirror without thinking that it is a mirror. Imagination is
more active in dreams, and consciousness and thought less so.
[1180]

90

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

When someone finally sorts out what the condition of our brain is while
we are representing or thinking it would be worthwhile to account for
the influence languages have upon it. It is undeniable that it cannot be a
matter of indifference for a finite system of fibers whether a concept, for
which there are two signs, occupies two positions or folds in the mind or
one. Physiognomical dithyrambs.
[1183]
Let us take Sir Isaac Newton. All discoveries belong to chance, whether they
come at the end or the beginning of the process, for otherwise reasonable
people could sit down and make discoveries like they write letters. Wit
spots a similarity, and reason tests it and finds it to be true: that is discovery.
[1195]
[. . .]
In philosophy this is often the case: if it is not true of all things, then it is
true of none, insofar as something is true only by being the plus or minus
of something else.
[1201]
You believe I chase after the singular because I do not know the beautiful;
no, it is because you do not know the beautiful that I seek the singular.
[1211]
One rule in reading is to condense the intention and main thoughts of the
author into a few words and in this way to make them one’s own. Whoever
reads in this way is occupied and gains something. When one reads without
comparison with one’s own inventory of knowledge or without synthesizing
it with one’s own system of thought, the mind gains nothing and loses
much.
[1222]
Regarding dreams, it is strange that one about being instructed is and can
be nothing more than the recollection or combination of concepts lying in
our head, and yet another person is created in the dream.
[1229]

Notebook G
1779–1783

The intellect, not just feeling, seems to be the bond that actually connects us
to the world and its purposes. The intellect first must apprehend something,
and then its conclusions, brought to clarity, may finally be joined with other
feelings through association. Drawing conclusions about perfection from
beauty is no better than drawing conclusions about the terrified feelings of
a dying man from his bodily convulsions and facial contortions. [. . .] [1]
It is almost impossible to carry the torch of truth through a crowd without
singeing someone’s beard.
[13]
What people call a subtle knowledge of human nature is for the most part
nothing other than one’s own weaknesses reflected back from others. [17]
Whoever knows himself properly can very soon know all other men. It is
all reflection.
[18]
I said to myself: I cannot possibly believe that, and while saying it, I noticed
I had already believed it a second time.
[21]
Men who know well how to observe themselves, and thus secretly know
a great deal, often are pleased to discover a weakness in themselves, where
such a discovery would normally disappoint. For many, the professor is
much more esteemed than the man.
[22]
It is certainly quite true that most people who are not capable of love are
also worth little in friendship. Still, one often sees the opposite.
[23]

91

92

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

It is a fault common to all people of little talent and more erudition than
understanding that they discover artificial rather than natural explanations.
[24]
The entire skeleton of our manner of thinking and our beliefs is formed
from our heroes, and in instances where we have the least experience and
deliberation, we simply follow a pattern, which in the end affects our
judgments if not also the consequences of our experience.
[25]
It has always been true that most men live more according to fashion than
[29]
reason.
There is a coup d’oeil for everything in the world, that is to say, every
rational person who hears or sees anything instinctively forms a judgment
about it. From the title of a book and how thick it is, for instance, a man
infers the worth of its contents. Of course, I am not suggesting that such
things influence his actual judgment, but only that with the first glance
at anything, he forms a judgment about it, proportionate to the sparse
information given, often without explicitly being aware of doing so. And
often a subsequent experience overturns the judgment. These are all seeds
of science from which Lambert could have cultivated something; yet also
here, not every seed produces a tree or a vegetable. But such hints should
never be neglected; they are the results of a number of acquired impressions
assembled in the most comprehensible manner.
[39]
Möser’s “the flour is important, not the mill” is excellent; the fruits of
philosophy, not the philosophy itself. When we ask what time it is, we do
not wish to know about the construction of a pocket watch. The knowledge
of means has today become a laudable science; yet nobody uses it for their
happiness or that of others. Knowledge of means, without actual application
of this knowledge, without indeed the ability or desire to apply it, is what
is now commonly called erudition.44
[40]
Since this life is no more than a vanishing point, I cannot understand why
the state of eternal glory does not begin immediately.
[42]
There is in my opinion a great difference between teaching reasoning and
being rational. There may be people who possess anything but common
sense and yet who speculate admirably upon the rules it must observe, just

Notebook G

93

as a physiologist can have knowledge of the constitution of the body and
yet be quite unhealthy. The greatest analysts of the human mind have not
always possessed practical reason. I am speaking here not of morals but of
logic.
[43]
Men have more difficulty believing in miracles than in the tradition of
miracles, and some Turks, Jews, and others who would now give their life for
their tradition would, at the moment the miracle occurred, have remained
sober minded. For at the moment a miracle occurs, it has no importance
other than that conferred by its own worth. To give something a physical
explanation is not yet impiety, as little as seeing it as a scam is blasphemy.
To actually deny a fact is in itself innocent; it becomes dangerous in this
world only when it contradicts others who defend its incontestability. Some
things, which in themselves are quite insignificant, become significant when
esteemed people believe them without really knowing why. Miracles must
be seen from a distance to be believed, just as one must see a cloud from
a distance if one is to believe it to be a solid body.
[45]
I myself believe in the doctrine of Helvétius: “What we will we can do,
but we do not will everything that we unemotionally wish we could do.”
The kind of will Helvétius means here is irresistible passion, which almost
never lacks the requisite ability.45
[53]
What can be the reason for man’s terrible aversion to showing himself
as he is, whether in his bedroom or in his most private thoughts? In the
material world, everything is both what it can be and at the same time
very forthright. According to our concepts, things are all that they can
possibly be with respect to one another, but man is not. He appears rather
to be that which he should not be. The art of concealing ourselves, or
our aversion to letting ourselves be seen naked, intellectually or morally, is
carried astonishingly far.
[56]
The heroes of the ancient poets are quite different from those in, for
example, Milton. They are brave, clever, and wise but are rarely, according
to our morals, amiable or merciful. Milton took his from the Bible. Does our
Christian morality perhaps have its origin in a certain weakness, in a Jewish
cowardice, while the other is founded on strength? Universal tolerance is
perhaps only an agreeable dream and something that will never be attainted.
[59]

94

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

We often know someone better than we can say, or at least than we do say.
Words, intensity of spirit, mood, ease, wit, interest—they all conceal and
lead to deception.
[61]
I know that look of affected attention; it is the lowest point of distraction.
[63]
To make man as religion would have him resembles the undertaking of the
Stoics; it is only another degree of the impossible.
[65]
Whoever expends just a little effort will soon notice that there is a certain
knowledge of human nature, a philosophy or theory of life that without
further investigation serves many as a guide to both action and speech.
There are even celebrated people who have little more to show. In mediumsized towns, for instance, the professor is invariably considered a pedant;
indeed, even university education is associated with rigidity. The nobleman
is another familiar character, yet the majority of noblemen are nothing like
this. The weak-minded are generally very much at home in this philosophy.
Words must occasionally be investigated, for the world can move on while
words remain behind. Thus always things not words! For even the words
infinite, eternal, and always have lost their meaning.
[68]
One should not believe that reason could become so morbid that people
would compliment one another when entering a funeral coach.
[70]
He was astonished that cats have two holes cut in their fur at precisely the
spot where their eyes are.
[71]
There are many who can believe anything they wish; what fortunate creatures
they are!
[79]
There are quite a few people who read simply to prevent themselves from
thinking.
[82]
To err is also human insofar as animals rarely or never err, or at least only
the cleverest among them do.
[85]
Of all things I have written about physiognomy, I wish only that two
observations be left to posterity. They are simple thoughts, and no one will

Notebook G

95

begrudge me them. The first is that I recognized the similarity between
physiognomy and prophecy, and the second is that I was convinced that
physiognomy would suffocate in its own fat.
[95]
Through our excessive reading we learn not only to take things for true
that are not, but our proofs also acquire a form that is often demanded
not so much by the nature of the case as by our unnoticed adherence to
fashion. Using familiar examples, we demonstrate things that we could as
convincingly support with examples from our own experience; and we even
cite as support sentences that prove nothing and propositions that are mere
tautologies. It is quite difficult to regard something in a new way and not
mediated by fashion or determined by our accepted paradigm. When we
should offer reasons and arguments, we instead offer our reputation; where
we should teach, we instead threaten; and where humans would have been
sufficient, we enlist gods for support.
[110]
Is it not peculiar that a literal translation is almost always a terrible one?
And yet anything can be translated well. One sees here what it really means
to understand fully a language; it means to understand fully the people who
speak it.
[135]
The book that most deserves to be banned would be a catalogue of banned
books.
[150]
Regarding a person who thinks only of the present, we might say he has
[153]
not discovered the immortality of the soul.
The man was working on a system of natural history in which he ordered
animals according to the form of their excrement. For this he created three
classes: cylindrical, spherical, and cake-like.
[161]
Both honest men and rogues simply confuse mine and yours. The honest
man regards the former as though it were the latter, and the rogue does
just the opposite.
[162]
Many people claim philosophical objectivity about certain things because
they understand nothing of them.
[165]
Undoubtedly, the strangest thing about this thought is that if he had it a
half minute later, he would have had it after his death.
[186]

96

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

A great way of attaining common sense is to strive constantly for clear
concepts—not merely by relying on the definitions of others, but as far as
possible by personal inquiry. We should repeatedly scrutinize things with
the intention of discovering something others have not yet observed. For
every word, we should at least once give ourselves an explanation and never
use any word we do not understand.
[206]
It is not easy to think too much, but it is easy to read too much. The
more things I think about, the more I endeavor to associate them with my
experiences and my own system of thought, the stronger I become. With
reading it is the contrary; I extend myself without increasing my strength.
When I notice in my thinking gaps I cannot fill or difficulties I cannot
overcome, I must consult a book and read. Either this is how one becomes
[208]
useful, or there is no way.
To shake your head while saying yes and nod it while saying no is difficult,
but it acquires a meaning of its own when you can do it.
[217]
Most people shut their eyes while they are being shaved. It would be a
blessing if we could shut our ears and other senses like we shut our eyes.
[221]
That it is so easy to shut our eyes and so difficult to shut our ears, except
by covering them with our hands, shows undeniably that heaven was more
concerned with the maintenance of our sensible apparatus than with the
pleasure of our soul. Our ears are our most alert sentinels in sleep. What
a blessing it would be if we could close and open our ears as easily as our
eyes!
[226]
Whoever does not yet know his science to such a degree that he feels every
offense against it like a grammatical error in his mother tongue still has
much to learn.
[230]
The human tendency to regard little things as significant has produced much
that is great.
[234]

Notebook H
1784–1788

The noble simplicity in the works of nature has its origin only too often
in the noble shortsightedness of the one who observes it.
[5]
There is a great difference between believing something and not being able to
believe the contrary. I can often believe things without being able to prove
them, just as I disbelieve others without being able to disprove them. The
position I take is determined not strictly by logic but by the preponderance
of evidence.
[12]
I suspect it must be the immutability of the laws of nature that creates
the majority of deists, especially among men of thought and intellect. The
more familiar we become with these laws, the more probable it is that in
this world things have never occurred otherwise than they now occur, nor
are miracles any more likely now than they ever were. That individuals and
even whole generations are deceived, that thousands of interests influence
our beliefs, that indeed it might even be a pleasure to believe something
we have never investigated—this is no miracle at all; we see it every day.
But that the sun should be eclipsed during a full moon or water changed
into wine is incomprehensible.
[14]
Anyone who reflects on the history of philosophy and natural science will
find that the greatest discoveries were made by people who regarded as
merely probable what others advanced as certain. They might be described as
adherents of the New Academy—a school that maintained a balance between
the rigorous certainty of the Stoics and the uncertainty and indifference of
the Skeptics. Such a philosophy is all the more to be recommended in that

97

98

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

we accumulate our ideas and opinions at a time when our understanding is
at its weakest. This point deserves to be considered with regard to religion.
[15]
As nations improve, so do their gods. But since the latter cannot immediately
be divested of all the human attributes coarser times have attributed to them,
the rational world still regards some of these notions as incomprehensible
or interprets them figuratively.
[18]
We might simply ask those who dispute Kant’s conception of space and
time what exactly they mean by true knowledge of objects and whether
such knowledge is even possible. All that I perceive is indeed due only to
me, and every effect of a thing external to me is indeed the truth; what
more as humans do we expect? It is a radical error on the part of those who
dispute the Kantian conception that they believe it would be idealism or
even a deception perpetrated by the creator of nature if Kant were correct.
Since all things in nature stand in relations to one another, what could be
more real or true than these relations? When I say that all bodies occupy
space, I am saying something quite real because I am speaking about the
relation of these bodies to me. But to claim that bodies occupy a space in
an objective sense is as nonsensical as attributing a color or even a language
to these things.—Even if none of this is illuminating, it at least shows that
the endeavors to refute Herr Kant are entirely in vain.
[19]
In all sciences, it can be advantageous to posit cases that as far as we know
do not occur in nature, just as mathematicians posit alternative laws of
[20]
gravity. It is always heuristic and may sometimes provoke insights.
If only I could dishabituate myself from everything, so I could see anew,
hear anew, and feel anew. Habit corrupts our philosophy.
[21]
We can do good in as many ways as we can sin, in thought, word, and
deed.
[22]
The most dangerous untruths are truths slightly distorted.

[24]

We must believe that everything has a cause, just as the spider spins its web
to catch flies. It does this before it knows flies exist.
[25]

Notebook H

99

There are truths that go about so garishly attired that we should take them
[27]
for lies, but they are pure truths nonetheless.
An imaginary incapacity can with timid people long play the role of a real
one, in works of the mind as much as the body.
[33]
Premeditated virtue is not worth much; feeling or habit is the thing. [35]
Every man has his personal superstition that sometimes in jest and sometimes
in earnest guides him. I am in a ridiculous way often its plaything, or it
mine. Positive religions are a subtle use of this human disposition. All men
experience something of this when they do not think clearly. And it is
certainly impossible that a deist as perfect as one depicted in our compendia
[42]
has ever existed.
If only children could be educated so that all things unclear were entirely
incomprehensible to them.
[50]
It is very good to read once again the books others have read already
a hundred times, for though the object remains the same, the subject is
different.
[54]
Shortsighted and farsighted are used incorrectly as metaphors of mental
capacity. Here shortsighted means blind; but it is clear that shortsighted
people also see things others do not.
[59]
Just as there are polysyllabic words that say very little, so too there are
monosyllabic words of infinite meaning.
[64]
It is a great trick of rhetoric merely to persuade people when one could
have convinced them; they often think themselves convinced when merely
persuaded.
[65]
With prophecies, the interpreter is often a more important man than the
prophet.
[89]
A great advantage of writing is also that it allows the thoughts and opinions
of one man to reach posterity undistorted. Tradition acquires something from

100

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

every mouth through which it passes and can eventually present a matter in
such a way that it becomes unrecognizable. It is always a translation. [130]
Nothing is more agreeable to me than instances where my sympathy or
antipathy precedes reason to discover how these are related, in other words,
to become aware of what I am in this world and why I am this way.—Our
entire philosophy, I believe, consists in becoming distinctly aware of what
we already are mechanically. It is strange heaven has granted us so much
latitude. Perhaps we fail so often in jest so that it does not occur to us in
our free will to fail in earnest.
[140]
The mind of man is no less provided for than is the body of an animal; what
in the latter is called appetite and instinct is in the former called common
sense. Both can suffocate; the only difference being that for an animal the
cause must be external, but for man it can also be internal. An animal is
for itself always a subject, while man is for himself also an object.
[142]
If the world should endure for an incalculable number of years, the universal
religion would be a refined Spinozism. Reason left to itself leads to nothing
else, and it is impossible that it should lead to anything else.
[143]
Undoubtedly a certain truth, and thus presumably a certain utility, underlies
religious hatred. I sincerely wish it could be discovered. Our philosophers
talk of religious hatred as something that could be reasoned away, but surely
it cannot be.
[144]
It is unquestionably one of the most clever achievements of the human mind
to have focused the hopes of man upon a point of time about which nothing
decisive for or against can ever be established, at least not with geometrical
certainty; this happens despite a vague feeling, difficult to analyze, that all
too clearly reminds us that all of this is nothing.
[145]
I and myself. I feel myself—these are two things. Our false philosophy is
embodied in our entire language; we cannot reason, so to speak, without
reasoning falsely. We fail to consider that speaking, regardless of what, is
philosophy. Anyone who speaks German is a folk philosopher, and our
academic philosophy consists in qualifications of this common philosophy.
All our philosophy is the correction of linguistic use, that is, the correction
of a philosophy, our most common one. But only this common philosophy

Notebook H

101

has the advantage of possessing declinations and conjugations. Thus true
philosophy is always taught in the language of false philosophy. Defining
words does not help, for in defining them we do not alter the pronouns
and their declinations.46
[146]
However we imagine representing to ourselves the things outside of us, these
representations will and must invariably carry some trace of the subject in
them. It seems to me a very unphilosophical idea to regard our soul as
merely passive; no, it also contributes something to the objects. Thus there
can be no being in the world that recognizes the world as it really is. I would
like to call this the affinities of the mental and physical worlds, and I can
very well imagine there might be beings for whom the order of the universe
would be music to which they dance while heaven plays accompaniment.
[147]
The greatest inconsistency human nature has yet made itself liable for is
allowing reason to be placed under the yoke of a book. It is difficult to
imagine anything more abysmal. This example alone shows what a helpless
creature man is in concreto, confined to this bipedal container of earth, water,
and salt. Were it ever possible for reason to erect a despotic throne, someone
who sincerely wished to refute the Copernican system on the authority of
a book would have to be hanged. Merely because it is written in a book
that it was created by God is no proof that it was. That our reason is from
God is certain; one need only take the word God as one wishes.—Where
reason reigns, it punishes by the natural consequences of a transgression,
or with instruction, if instruction may be called punishment.
[148]
One cannot consider often enough that the existence of God, the immortality
of the soul, and the like are merely conceivable not cognizable. They are
associations of ideas, a play of thoughts, to which nothing objective need
correspond. It was a great error of Wolffian philosophy to extend the
principle of contradiction to what is cognizable, for it concerns merely
what is conceivable.
[149]
If we consider idealism in relation to the various stages of life, it commonly
follows this course: in our youth, we initially smile at the absurdity of
it; soon we find the idea agreeable, clever, and defensible; then we enjoy
disputing about it with people who, because of their age or social standing,
still find themselves at the first stage. At a mature age, we indeed find it

102

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

useful to tease ourselves and others with it, but on the whole we find it
hardly worth refuting and contrary to nature. We do not think it worthwhile
to consider it any longer, for we believe we have already thought about it
often enough. But later, after earnest meditation and more acquaintance
with human affairs, it acquires an irresistible power. We need only consider
that even granting there are objects outside of us, we can know absolutely
nothing of their objective reality. However matters might stand, we are
and remain simple idealists; indeed, we cannot do otherwise. For nothing
can be given to us except through representations. The belief that these
representations and sensations are caused by objects outside of us is just
another representation or idea. Idealism is entirely impossible to refute; for
even if there were objects outside of us, we would still remain idealists, as
we cannot possibly know anything about them. Just as we believe that things
occur outside of us without any contribution on our part, the representations
of these things might also arise within us without any contribution on our
part. Indeed, it is without any contribution on our part that we have become
what we are. The reason so many people are not conscious of this is that they
associate the word representation with a very incomplete concept, namely,
that of a dream or a fantasy. These are certainly species of representations,
but they do not exhaust the genus. It is undoubtedly here that the cause
of the misunderstanding lies. We must first agree on what is meant by
representation. There are certainly different kinds of representations, but
none of them clearly indicates that they originate from outside of us. What
indeed is outside, external? What are objects praeter nos? What does the
preposition praeter imply? It is a merely human invention, a name to indicate
a difference from other things we do not designate as praeter nos. They are
all sensations.
[150]
To say we cognize external objects is contradictory; it is impossible for man to
go outside of himself. Where we believe we see objects, we see only ourselves.
We can actually know nothing of the world except ourselves and the changes
that occur within us. Contrary to what we commonly say, we cannot possibly
feel for others; we feel only for ourselves. The proposition sounds harsh,
but it is not when properly understood. It is neither father nor mother,
neither wife nor child that we love, but only the pleasant emotions they
occasion—something that flatters our pride and self-love. It cannot possibly
be otherwise, and anyone who denies this has evidently not understood it.
In this matter language should not be philosophical, any more than in regard
to the universe it should be Copernican. In nothing, I believe, does man’s

Notebook H

103

superior mind appear so clearly as in the fact that he even knows how to
discover the tricks that nature would play on him. One question, however,
remains: who is right, the man who believes he is being deceived or the
man who believes that he is not? Unquestionably, the man who believes
he is not being deceived is right. But neither of them really believes he is
being deceived. As soon as I know I am being deceived, it is no longer a
deception. Language originated prior to philosophy, and that is what makes
philosophy difficult, especially when it is a matter of making it clear to those
who do not themselves reflect very much. When philosophy speaks, it is
always compelled to express itself in the language of nonphilosophy. [151]
Just as the highest law is the greatest injustice, so too is the greatest injustice
[154]
often the highest law.
People do not think so differently about the events of life as they speak
about them.
[158]
Why do animals not squint? This is also a virtue of human nature. [165]
We believe we are free in our actions, just as in a dream we think a place
completely familiar that we are doubtless now seeing for the first time.
[. . .]
[169]
What am I? What shall I do? What may I hope and believe? All things in
philosophy can be reduced to this. If only other things could be made so
simple. We should at least see whether everything we intend to consider in
a book may not from the beginning be formulated similarly.47
[172]
[. . .] Philosophers must consider and write about all things, even the most
common ones—this more than anything else brings focus to a system.
[. . .]
[174]
For once to really evaluate the concept of matter. We attribute impenetrability
and resistance to its inner space but do not consider that all of this can
and must be the effect of forces. This leads perfectly to the Kantian
conception. The foundations of a natural science could be conceived really
well by beginning with consciousness and then showing that everything one
thinks and senses is merely consciousness of the modifications of one’s self.
Meditandum et tentandum.48
[176]

104

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

Never regard matter as entirely exhausted; everywhere there is still something.
[179]
More and less is for true philosophical contemplation nothing. This is what
makes explanations of phenomena in nature so difficult; we attribute too
much importance to things universal and widespread and are able to concern
ourselves too little with things that are infrequent or rare yet substantial.
[182]
[. . .]
It would be very much worthwhile for once truly to investigate why we
know nothing of the origin of motion. A real criterion for this could be to
determine where to begin or end. We have not, I think, always attended
intensely enough to this peculiar circumstance. There is here a more
determinate limit than anywhere else because it seems to be not so much
a lack of experience as an absolute barrier, or at least a clue as to where
such a barrier is to be sought.
[183]
When we mistakenly judge an object to be larger than it actually is—as we
do with the moon on the horizon, for example—, do the individual parts
also appear more distinct? Can I recognize a sunspot that I could not have
noticed at midday or see in the moon on the horizon things that would
have been impossible to distinguish at midday?
[198]
[. . .] It is actually evidence for the great limitation of our sensibilities
that we do not see the essence of things. We see the color, feel the weight,
impenetrability, and density of a magnet; but these properties are not—
whether taken separately or together—that by virtue of which the magnet
attracts iron, for other objects also possesses all of these properties. [201]

Golden Notebook
Winter 1789

What is duration? According to my system?

[15]

Where we experience no localized sensation, where we do not actually feel
the impression on our sense organs, we cannot reduce anything to our
bodies. If we could not shut our eyes, we would not know whether we see
with our head or our stomach. [. . .]
[16]
If the New Testament accurately contains the precepts of the Christian
religion, then the Catholic religion is hardly Christian. Indeed, it is even
written there: drink ye all of it. The Catholic religion received its present
form in times of the grossest ignorance in which minds were fettered, and
now man who is once again permitted to exercise reason is supposed to
continue to adhere to it. This is impossible, and it can be maintained only
by fire and sword.
[33]
Form is determination or the manner of thinking something; matter is what
is given and determinable.
[54]
The resolution to make the inner feeling of bliss, however it might arise,
everlasting through virtue is a praise of the being in which or through which
I exist—be it the god of the Christians or of Spinoza.
[58]
It is necessary to agitate all of our knowledge and then let it settle again
in order to see how everything is arranged. [. . .]
[78]
To discover between things relationships and similarities that no one else
sees. In this way, wit can lead to invention.
[86]
105

Notebook J
1789–1793

Writing is an excellent means of awakening the system sleeping within each
of us; anyone who has ever written will have discovered that writing always
awakens something that, though it lay within us, we did not previously
clearly recognize.
[19]
The Kantian philosophy may establish whatever kingdom it wishes, but if
it does not wish to sink into old, familiar chatter, it must admit that our
representations correspond to something in the world.
[28]
It is undoubtedly far easier to explain the constitution of the world than
that of a plant. [. . .]
[34]
[. . .] What is publicly prohibited cannot be secretly condoned, for
otherwise what is secret threatens to corrupt everything. It is foolish after
all to prohibit a man from making a fist in his pocket. This evidently touches
on the freedom to speak in public, which cannot be suppressed without
[57]
spies. 		
How might an entry on typos best be explained in an encyclopedic dictionary
using examples and lessons?
[71]
One use of dreams may be that they represent impartially our entire being,
freed from our often forced and artificial reflections. This thought deserves
very much to be taken to heart.
[72]
A teacher and a professor cannot educate individuals, only species. This is
a thought that deserves very much to be taken to heart and disputed. [73]
107

108

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

I believe that instinct in man can anticipate the conclusions of reason
and that some things may thus be revealed by a less educated but more
acute sensibility that guarded reason cannot yet follow or attain. A brute
passion is produced within us without our being in a position to explain
whence it arises. I include here the doctrine of the immortality of the
soul. After our life, things will be just as they were before it began; this is
an instinctive anticipation of any reasoned conclusion. This cannot yet be
proved, but taken together with other conditions such as unconsciousness
or stupefaction, it possesses an irresistible force for me and presumably
does so for many who do not wish to admit it. Not a single argument has
convinced me otherwise. My opinion in this is nature; the other is an art
whose conclusion everything contradicts as completely and forcefully as
anything can be contradicted.
[78]
Although it is not certain, in the futuris contingentibus, it does not bode
well. 			
[85]
Do you believe the world has ever been any different than it is now? Do
you believe blackthorn bushes have ever borne oranges? No. Very well, do
you believe there have ever been men who were sons of God? Yes! Oh thou
just God, how low thy gift of reason may sink. What a feeble instrument
reason is.
[99]
When he attends church and reads his bible, the ordinary man confuses
the means with the end—a very common error.
[102]
Mathematics has its independence of everything that is not mere quantity
solely to thank for the great advances that have been made in it. Everything
that is not quantity is thus completely foreign to it. Since, therefore, it is
concerned only with this and needs no outside assistance, being nothing
other than the development of the laws of the human mind, it is not
only the most certain and dependable of human sciences but also certainly
the easiest. Everything that can serve its enlargement is in man himself.
Nature equips every intelligent man with the complete apparatus, which
we receive as our endowment. It is thus the easiest of sciences inasmuch
as we cannot ever hope to go as far in any other. Whoever can prove the
forty-seventh proposition in the first book of Euclid has already made much
more progress in the development of these laws of the human mind or of
quantity than has ever been made in physics.—But who wishes to establish

Notebook J

109

here a quantity or scale? It seems then that what is useful lies everywhere
quite near. The certainty of human sciences must henceforth be investigated
[103]
accordingly.
We do much on our deathbed and even in our deathbed that as a reasonable
person we would never have done. We take up childhood beliefs again, just
as we soil the bed again, and we no longer know what we are losing. [117]
Jacobi on Spinoza’s philosophy (Preface, 17). Lessing says: “There is no other
philosophy than that of Spinoza. And in the same place: “The consistent
determinist is no different than the fatalist” (21). Herr Jacobi’s writings on
Hume and Idealism and Realism lead to the conclusion that we understand
nothing of the being of all beings, and if we wished to investigate it, we would
find it impossible given our modes of representation. Yet both teach that we
should believe in such an incomprehensible being (merely incomprehensible?
Belief is something miserable here. What is belief? Obviously, we must
believe). Regarding the entire spirit of Spinozism, Jacobi believes a nihilo
nihil fit. (I also do not understand how from the fact that all phenomena
have a cause we hope to prove that the whole must have an external cause;
it seems we first must prove we can approximate this first cause, as we do in
the expression of irrational numbers, but this is impossible to prove).49 [144]
“Ah!” he exclaimed at his mishap, “if only I had done something delightfully
sinful this morning, I would know why I am suffering now!”
[150]
When I dispute with someone in a dream, and he refutes and teaches me,
it is I who am teaching myself, that is to say, reflecting. This reflection is
presented in the form of a dialogue. Can we be surprised then if earlier
peoples, such as Eve, attributed their own thoughts to the serpent and
expressed them with: “The serpent spoke to me. God spoke to me. My
spirit spoke to me.” Since we do not know exactly where we think, we can
locate our thoughts wherever we wish. Just as we can speak in such a way
that whoever hears us believes it is coming from a third person, so too we
can think as though we were being spoken to. Socrates’ demon is such a
phenomenon. What an incredible amount may we not yet develop from
dreams! 		
[171]
The melancholic, poetic, and so forth in love is actually its own form of
the contemplation of pleasure; man possesses more than one form of inner
feeling.		
[179]

110

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

I read somewhere that Christian morality is everywhere a support and
supplement to the law but that the remainder of religion supports
[228]
superstition.
According to Reinhold, every representation must consist of a component
that refers to the object that is distinct from it. This is what he calls the
“matter of representation,” and it is that through which what is represented
(the object) belongs to the representation. Every representation must also,
however, consist of another component that refers to the subject (that which
represents), which is also distinct from the representation in consciousness. It
is by virtue of this component that the representation belongs to the mind;
and it can be nothing other than that through which the otherwise mere
matter of a representation can become an actual representation. This is the
form of representation, which the matter can acquire only in the mind and
through the representational faculty. As long as it is unclear in what this
form consists, then that which in the representation belongs to the mind
must be attributed to the object, and that which belongs to the object must
be attributed to the mind. The original sin of previous philosophy!50 [234]
Current popular philosophy is merely only the flesh of Kantian philosophy.
[250]
As with any language, learning to speak the Kantian language becomes more
difficult with age, but one can always learn to write it.
[251]
Feder’s review of Reinhold’s theory of the power of cognition can be found
[258]
in the Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, no. 14 (1790).
A representation referred to the subject is sensation, to the immediate object
intuition.
[262]
Revelation does not make me understand a thing, but I understand it when
it has authority. Yet what authority can force me to believe something that
contradicts my reason? The word of God alone. Yet do we possess any word
of God that stands outside reason? Certainly not. For it is men who have
said the Bible is the word of God, and men can know no word of God
[269]
other than reason.
It was no friendly act on the part of Herr Kant toward his readers that he
wrote his work in such a way that one must study it like a work of nature.

Notebook J

111

With works of nature, the effort and enthusiasm involved in the investigation
are sustained by the conviction that the whole is worth investigating and
that if one discovers anything it will be something worthy of the effort. In
the works of man, however, this is not to be expected, for the author may
have erred, and in the end all will result in a Jacob-Böhmeism. Herr Kant
is certainly already due a great deal of credit in this world, but his book
concerns a topic that in itself is not the most interesting for the rest of
the world; yet one must, through repeated readings, become familiar with
concepts such as representation. The subjects treated in Herr Kant’s book are
admittedly quite interesting, but not everyone can immediately recognize
[270]
that.		
Long before the invention of the papacy and purgatory, it was already
customary to pray for the dead. I believe that love for my mother
even once induced me to pray for her. This is nothing more than the
anthropomorphization, the humanization of all that of which we know and
can know nothing that we encounter everywhere.
[271]
Many, such as the witty, obscurely sense how mechanical man is in his
so-called acts of free will but do not make this known. The intuitions
of the genii Socratis et Kepleri aliorumque, the invocation of muses. With
regard to the body, we are obviously slaves. We have doctors for when
we are ill and books for when we are thinking. What if the belief we are
acting freely consists merely in the feeling that the clock is now working
properly?51
[275]
How did men ever arrive at the concept of freedom? It was grand idea. [276]
Our theologians wish with force to make of the Bible a book in which
there is no human understanding or common sense.
[277]
That a false hypothesis is at times to be preferred to the correct one can
be seen in the doctrine of the freedom of man. Man is certainly not free,
but a quite profound study of philosophy is required not to be misled by
this idea. Among a thousand people, none has the time and patience for
such study, and among the hundred that do, not one has the mind or spirit
for it. Freedom is thus really the most convenient way of thinking about
the matter for oneself and, since it has appearance on its side, will always
remain the most conventional one.
[278]

112

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

Before God there are only rules—actually, only one rule and no exceptions.
Because we do not know this supreme rule, we create general rules that are
not rules at all; indeed, it could be possible that what we call “rules” could
for finite beings even still be exceptions.
[279]
I believe the Spinozist and the deist differ only in opinion in the way that
the Newtonians and Eulerians do with regard to the theory of colors.52 [280]
Belief in a God is an instinct as natural to man as walking on two legs; in
many it is certainly modified and by some even suffocated entirely. Usually
it is present, and if our faculty of knowledge, our inner being, is to be well
formed, it is indispensable.
[281]
Both systems lead a reasonable mind to the same conclusion, so in order to
see if Spinozism is correct, one can make use of Deism, just as one often
makes a visual judgment to test the most accurate measurements. [282]
Whoever has less than he desires must know he has more than he is worth.
[304]
If we really were the free creatures they would have us believe we are, our
thoughts would have to extend much further. We should be able to stop
thunderstorms with our earnest will; unfortunately, however, our so-called
spirit is determined by circumstances, and it cannot extend so far but can
merely passively determine physical bodies.
[322]
I do not think it entirely impossible that a man might live forever, for
continual diminution does not necessarily imply cessation.
[341]
[. . .] We must have hypotheses and theories in order to organize our
knowledge, otherwise everything remains merely detritus—and we already
have a great deal of scholars who produce this.
[342]
The world of words.

[357]

If dogs, wasps, and hornets possessed human reason, they could perhaps
conquer the world.
[360]
Non cogitant, ergo non sunt.

[379]

Notebook J
An autopsy cannot uncover those faults that end with death.

113

[382]

Hypotheses serve not only to retain a number of facts but also to establish
many for the person who produces them. [. . .]
[387]
That is the weather side of my moral constitution; I can endure something
[388]
on that side.
I made a sketch of him, so he will find it easier to recover his body on
judgment day.
[390]
A long speech may easily be learned by heart and a long poem even more
so. How difficult it would be to memorize the same number of words
strung together without any meaning or a speech in a foreign language!
Sense and understanding are thus an aid to memory. Sense is order, and
order is in the end nothing but conformity with our nature. When we
speak sensibly, we are only speaking in accordance with our essence and
our nature. When we wish to commit anything to memory, we endeavor
always to introduce some definite sense or order into it; for example, we use
genera and species in the case of plants and animals, and with other things we
show resemblances by introducing rhymes. Our hypotheses belong here as
well: they are necessary, for without them we would be unable to remember
things. This was said long ago, but it is something we constantly encounter
again from all directions. We endeavor to make sense of the physical world
in this way. The question is, however, whether everything is legible to us.
Certainly through much experiment and reflection we are able to introduce
meaning into things that are either for us or altogether meaningless. Thus
we see faces or landscapes in the sand, though they certainly are not there.
Symmetry is another example, as are silhouettes in inkblots and so forth,
and the same may be said of the ascending scale we introduce in the animal
kingdom:—all this is not in the things but in us. In general, we cannot too
frequently reflect that in observing nature, and especially the order found
in nature, we are always only observing ourselves.
[392]
The attempts of the physicists—that of Lesage, for example—to explain
gravity, attraction, and affinity mechanically are further examples of what I
mention above. Such explanations, however, are always as useful as inventing
a machine capable of reproducing such effects. If someone could create a
machine that represented the motion of heavenly bodies exactly as in nature,

114

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

would it not be of great value even though the universe does not move by
gears and mechanisms? A good deal would be discovered through such a
machine, which he would not believe he himself had included in designing
it. What is mathematics but such a machine?53
[393]
It is and will always remain a strange expression to say, “The soul is in
me; it is in the body,” when we should say, “I am this.” For we do not
say, “The roundness is in the sphere.” It is merely similarity that misleads
us here. Identity is something objective, but similarity is subjective. [404]
Catachresis. Vir gregis ipse caper. The misuse of a word because of lack of
a better one; this is why our metaphors are most often catachreses.54 [410]
The fly that does not want to be swatted is safest when it sits on the fly
swatter. 		
[415]
The synonyms of a language betray at least in part the remnants of a nation’s
knowledge, just as the language of a people contains its common philosophy.
The common folk philosophy does not extend very far. When I say that
gold is as heavy as cork, I am expressing a great truth that fewer than one
out of a hundred people understands, even among educated people. If I say
that cork is not as heavy as gold, then I express a truth that is understood
by anyone who understands the words; the same is the case when I say
that a pound of cork is as heavy as a pound of gold. The latter is also
true. Really these things should stand in the opposite order, with the first
coming last. Regardless of this, it is surprising that with the words of our
common philosophy we can speak about things that go beyond them; that
is to say, we speak in analogies. Thus one would have to state the doctrine
of universal gravity without making use of concepts outside of those used in
the game of the goose. This is how Lesage’s theory is in the worst case. [417]
It is after all always a key question in the Kantian philosophy to ask how
he arrives at the certainty that some knowledge is a priori. Regarding the
principle of causality, for example, it is also a matter of experience, as
much as there is any such objective dependence. Feder, Göttingische gelehrte
Anzeigen 1790, no. 144.
[429]
An excellent motto: “Opinions are continually varying, where we cannot
have mathematical evidence of the nature of things; and they must vary.

Notebook J

115

Nor is that variation without its use, since it occasions a more thorough
discussion, whereby error is often dissipated true knowledge is encreased
and its principles become better understood and more firmly established”
(Franklin’s Letters on Philosophical Subjects, Letter 38).
[431]
Rousseau says that a child who learns to know only its parents does not
even know them—quite nice and true.55
[433]
A screw without a beginning.

[434]

The feeling of truth.

[439]

Those who think a great deal for themselves will find much wisdom recorded
in language. We probably do not add it all ourselves, but much wisdom
[443]
does reside there, just as in proverbs.
A slave of belief.

[446]

Humanitarianism. If I see someone in the distance secretly squashing
something, I must believe it is a flea until I can prove to myself with
apodictic certainty it is a louse.
[460]
Fontenelle was once asked how it happened that he had so many friends
and no enemies: “Par ces deux axioms,” he answered, “tout est possible, et
[464]
tout le monde a raison.”56
To smell what time it is—a peculiar clock indeed.

[468]

Just as the followers of Herr Kant always accuse their opponents of not
understanding him, I suspect there are many who believe he is correct simply
because they understand him. His way of representing things is novel and
differs considerably from the usual, and once we finally gain some insight
into it, we are inclined to regard it as true, especially since it has so many
zealous adherents. We should always remember, however, that understanding
something is no reason for believing that it is true. I believe the satisfaction
in having understood an extremely abstract and obscure system leads many
to believe that its truth has thereby been demonstrated.
[472]
It would be peculiar if the true system of philosophy and the true system
of the cosmos both originated in Prussia. Both are useful for predicting a

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

116

certain kind of eclipse, but there are certainly fewer epicycles in the Kantian
[473]
system. 		
Nothing is more common than for people to consider themselves convinced
of the truth of something as soon as they have understood the opinion a
great man has held about the matter. These are, however, very different
things. It has often happened to me. I believe that many people, once they
have labored their way through the difficulties of the Tychonian system and
all its epicycles, have thought: “Praise the Lord, I have finally figured it
all out.”57
[475]
The complete table of the categories that according to Kant are the pure products
of the understanding:
1. Quantity
		

Unity, Plurality, Totality

2. Quality
		

Reality, Negation, Limitation

3. Relation
		 Inherence and Subsistence, Causality and Dependence,
Community
4.		Modality
		Possibility—Impossibility,
Necessity—Contingency

Existence—Nonexistence,

Without these laws of thought, everything in us would be particular and
[481]
disconnected; through them, things are combined and ordered.58
He judges in each case according to the particular state of the aggregates
of his sensations.
[482]
Such people do not really defend Christianity, but they do allow Christianity
to defend them.
[504]
He learned to play a few pieces on the metaphysic.

[507]

Notebook J

117

Mississippi: a word with eleven letters and yet only four—four s, four i, two
[510]
p, and an m.
Anyone who plunders the ideas of an ancient writer could defend himself
by appealing to metempsychosis and say: “Prove I was not also that writer.”
[511]
We cannot really know whether we are not at this moment sitting in a
madhouse.
[520]
Most teachers of faith defend their propositions, not because they are
convinced of their truth, but because they once claimed they were true. [521]
Nothing more clearly proves to me how matters stand in the world of
learning than the fact that Spinoza was for so long regarded as an evil,
disreputable man and his opinions as dangerous; the reputations of so many
others have suffered a similar fate.
[523]
From the chapter titles of Spinoza’s Ethics, one can already grasp its main
ideas:
1. de Deo
2. de natura & origine mentis
3. de origine et natura affectuum
4. de Servitute human seu de affectuum viribus
5. de Potentia intellectus seu de Libertate humana.

[525]

We say of a certain kind of unintelligent idea that it is a foolish idea; we
also say things are foolish. Certainly the first person to use this phrase
had something in mind. It may refer to what is unexpected or strange in a
connection of ideas or to the overleaping that one often finds with foolish
[529]
people. 		
In the end, everything leads to the question: “does thought originate in
feeling or feeling in thought?” As Garve showed very early in his commentary
on Ferguson’s moral philosophy, this is the ultimate principle of religion,

118

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

and the answer to the question, “Is the power of feeling or the power of
thought the ultimate reality?” indicates the final limit between theism and
atheism.59
[531]
Flatt, or rather Schwab, believes one must explain the doctrine of the trinity
in terms of three-dimensional space.60
[533]
Someone wishes to look something up in the dictionary and searches for
the name of his girlfriend, his enemy, or his idol. It would have to be a
[562]
chemical dictionary. [. . .]
Our idea of the soul is not unlike the idea of a magnet in the earth. It is
merely a picture. To think all things according to such forms is a means of
conceptualization innate to man.
[568]
In the preface to the second and third editions of Kant’s Critique of Pure
Reason (the third edition is only a reprint of the second), many peculiar
things appear that I have often thought but never expressed. We find no
cause in things but notice only that which corresponds to something within
ourselves. Wherever we look, we see only ourselves.
[569]
Vere scire est per causas scire: “to know truly is to know by causes.”—Francis
Bacon.61		
[573]
Universally valid laws of perfection for works of sentiment and fantasy. [579]
Clocks that strike an hour and repeat.

[580]

A creature of a higher kind who makes the entire history of the world repeat
itself in the way one makes a watch repeat.
[581]
A multicolored confusion.
Epitaph at Arlington, near Paris:
Here lie
Two grandmothers with their two granddaughters
Two husbands with their two wives
Two fathers with their two daughters

[598]

Notebook J

119

Two mothers with their two sons
Two maidens with their two mothers
Two sisters with their two brothers.
Yet but six corpses all lie buried here,
All born legitimate, from incest clear.
This riddle, which was given to me by someone who himself did not know
the solution, I solved in the following way: Two old men, each of whom
has a grown son, each of whom has an unmarried daughter, marry two
young girls who are sisters. After the weddings, both old men become sick
and die before the marriages are consummated. After their deaths, the two
young men marry their stepmothers: these last six are those who are buried
here. For here two sisters are also lying with their two brothers, because
[599]
every woman calls her sister’s husband her brother.
It is of little consolation that from the lack of correspondence between the
inner and the outer man, I mean between the esoteric and the exoteric,
one can infer something similar about the works of nature. For how few
friends would remain friends if they could see each other’s dispositions as
a whole?
[600]
The most accomplished ape cannot draw a picture of an ape; this too only
man can do, but it is also only man who regards this ability as a merit. [613]
I have long thought that philosophy will yet devour itself.—Metaphysics
has already partially devoured itself.
[620]
In the review of Carl Christian Erhard Schmid’s Essay on Moral Philosophy
(Jena 1790) (Literatur-Zeitung, no. 108, 1791), it is well said: Herr Schmid
distinguishes first between the subject of moral action as an object of
experience and as a thing in itself (object, πμ), in the usual manner of the
critical philosophy. He then shows how one might conceive of a being
who could in itself freely cause an action, thus entirely independent of the
influence of any temporal causal series (occurring within the form of time,
πμ), but at the same, to the extent that it appears active, must in all of its
cognizable actions be regarded as necessarily determined. In order to save
freedom, he further distinguishes between the matter and form of moral
action; he leaves the matter to the mechanisms of nature and attributes
the form to reason, autonomous and independent of morality. The more

120

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

soundly this is then considered, the more the reviewer is astonished
that a chapter is entitled “Pervasive Necessity.” (Herr Schmid discovers
necessity quite artificially in that which in itself underlies all sensibility
and appearance; otherwise, he believes that anything not necessary is
accidental, πμ) To this the reviewer responds: it is precisely the incorrectness
of the unqualifiedly expressed proposition, either necessity or contingency,
that is really decisive in this issue of freedom. This is a quite unique
capacity to include the ground for something without being subject to
some necessity, which, indeed, is unknowable and incomprehensible but
nonetheless completely conceivable. The reviewer then finds no further
difficulties in the matter since coming to terms with the following concepts:
freedom in the cosmological sense is for him the capacity to contain and
make active the complete ground for the reality of new circumstances,
without being determinable necessarily either by external forces or by its
own constitution. In a being that possesses reason and sensibility, this
capacity is moral freedom; it is the capacity to contain and make active the
complete ground of actions, which are contrary to or in accords with the
moral laws of reason, without being determinable necessarily either by the
influence of external forces or by its own representations. Such a faculty is
as little a faculty of necessary as contingent actions and yet is a faculty for
containing the grounds for an action. That we can conceive of grounds
whose effects, according to the relation of the dependence of an effect on
its ground, do not stand under the form of necessity can be attributed to
the fact that the pure concept of a ground extends further than the concept
of a ground thought as operative under the form of necessity; and further, it
can be attributed to the fact that this form of necessity regarding effects
and causes is applicable only within the sensory world; but the sensory
world presents neither things in themselves nor all aspects of the universe.
That, however, the form of necessity is subject to this qualification follows
from the essence and limitations of the form of inner sense, time, as that
which gives the concept of necessity its sense (quite good, πμ).62 [629]
A character: everyone forms an incorrect idea of him and hates and persecutes
him according to this image.
[630]
A character: a man who, like me, always speaks for his dog when he is
playing with it. This could be applied to children as well; that is true
guardianship.
[634]

Notebook J

121

For several days (since April 22, 1791) I have been living according to the
hypothesis (for I always live according to some hypothesis) that drinking with
meals is harmful, and as a result I feel excellent. There is certainly something
true in this. For through no change in my lifestyle and no medicine have
I ever before experienced such a good effect so quickly and palpably as
this. 			
[639]
Only the egoist and the idealist doubt the existence of beings praeter nos.
That, however, we change preater into extra, and regard beings praeter nos
as extra nos, think of them as occupying a different space, seems to be a
form of sensibility. Could the praeter me also not be a form of our sensible
[643]
faculty? 		
One of the most excellent observations supporting the Kantian theory
of space has for me always been that we must regard physical bodies as
infinitely divisible, which contradicts reason; for it is not at all necessary, it is
indeed not possible that, for example, inertia and impenetrability should be
the effects of a complex body, and yet we always think of these as existing
in space. This is a form of sensible intuition.
[646]
Practical reason or moral sense: the latter expression will make it more
intelligible to many what one means by the former.
[656]
It is astonishing how often the word infinite is misused: everything
is infinitely more beautiful, infinitely better, and so on. There must be
something agreeable about the concept, or its misuse could not have become
so widespread. What have the ancients to gain from this?
[661]
When you are sitting in a shoddy carriage, you really can make such a face
that the entire carriage appears outstanding; this is also true of horses. [675]
The things outside of us are nothing other than how they appear to us;
this is true, for us at least, since we can observe only relations because the
observing substance invariably intervenes. Even God sees in things only
[681]
himself. 		
No matter how simple an idea, it will always govern something and abound
somewhere. The man in the moon abounds in our calendar illustrations.
[682]

122

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

In order to find something, many, if not most, people must first know that
[688]
it is there.
Something could be said about the art of translation, which could be of
great use. I mean the art of translating the language and actions of ordinary
people into the true language of our life. Ordinary people often express
themselves appallingly or humorously about things, but if it were translated
into our language, they would appear to speak quite differently. The way
we think about the events of life does not differ as widely as does the way
we speak about them.
[692]
In toto aliquid et ex omnibus nihil—that would be the most abstract
philosophy.63
[694]
The picture-book of the world.

[702]

We are lost if given too much time to think about ourselves, assuming we
do not regard ourselves as an object of observation like a prepared specimen
but always as the sum of all that we now are. We become aware of so many
dismal things that, at the sight of it all, the desire to arrange it or hold it
together evaporates.
[704]
A system: through the transmigration of souls, every man arrives at the
condition that during his life he most envied and desired; thus in the end
everything will revolve in a circle, and no class will be entirely empty. [705]
When we shatter the limbs of a murderer on the breaking wheel, it is a
question whether we do not fall into the same mistake as a child who strikes
a chair after bumping into it.
[706]
If only we had the snuff that misses our nose! The same is true of procreation.
In any process something is always lost, in the physical as well as the moral.
[710]
Perhaps a kind of fairy tale could be written on the basis of Kantian
philosophy, with other forms of intuition, and where light becomes music.
My God what is this? This is time? Such a thing would certainly be
nonsense; we have only parables and satires about the actual world, as in
Count Hamilton’s fairy tales.64
[711]

Notebook J

123

I believe that in comparison with the English, the German suppresses more
with reason, which really should never happen. On many occasions, for
instance, on which it would never occur to the Englishman to laugh, a
German does not laugh because he knows it would be improper.
[712]
In preaching useful truths to men, everything is permitted that does not
harm or offend anyone, even fairy tales. No one any longer finds it absurd
that animals speak in fables, so why should we find it tasteless if it rains
pearls? A wise man would do more than many a sorcerer in a fairy tale
if he could make a fool wise—why should he not create fictions for this
[713]
purpose?
My auction catalogues and translation machine could be used in a fairy
tale—also the doubled men, upon whose heads a kind of cuckoo bird sits,
who always says what they are thinking while their mouths are speaking,
and a megaphone that, even when one whispers, carries one’s voice to the
one for whom it is intended.
[714]
One of my strangest character traits is certainly the peculiar superstition
with which I discover in anything an omen and everyday find an oracle in
a hundred things. I need not describe it, as I understand myself here all too
well. Each movement of an insect is an answer to a question about my fate.
Is this not peculiar for a professor of physics? Yet is it not something based
in human nature, and only in me has it become monstrous and exaggerated
beyond the natural proportion in which it is beneficial?
[715]
He was no “slave to his word,” as they say; on the contrary, he exercised
such despotism over his promises that he could do with them whatever he
[719]
wished.		
Might we not say of philosophy examined microscopically that it is Kantian?
First one uses the naked eye, then small telescopes, and then stronger ones;
to observe the course of the stars we do not need a Herschel telescope.65
[724]
We are so constructed that we will very rarely be accurate judges of what
is useful to us. It is the case in this life; and who will guarantee it is not
also the case in the next life? Whom the Lord loveth, he chastiseth. What
if this means: whom the Lord loveth, he destroyeth?
[725]

124

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

Fairy tale: to represent visually how the soul and body interact with one
[727]
another; at the least something amusing could be made of this.
There are many forms possible according to which certain masses of ideas
and experiences could be ordered and united into an observable whole.
The review of Heydenreich’s Ästhetik in the recent Bibliothek der schönen
Wissenschaften (43, 2nd part, p. 223) says admirably: “Just as in painting,
philosophy cannot represent an object entirely en face, and less so can it
represent an object or subject matter with all of its traits. Each searches for
a certain phrase, a certain profile, and chooses certain traits that fit this. A
new theory is often an old object or subject matter depicted from a new side.
With this new position or attitude certain aspects must be left out.”66 [732]
One should never look for genuine Christian convictions in a man who
makes a show of his piety.
[733]
The form of a game of chess and even that of the Talmud and the old
scholastic philosophy is good, but the matter is not of much use. One
exercises one’s faculties, but what one learns in doing so is of no value. [749]
Many people regard as divine that which has no rational sense. The
enjoyment in contemplating useless algebraic equations one has contrived
oneself belongs in this class.
[750]
[. . .] Some people arrive at an idea, and others stumble upon it; some fall
into it, while others fall over it (we are missing only to fall apart from it).
We also say, “I have taken to an idea,” but not, “I have betaken myself to
an idea.” That would be the via regia.
[756]
The principle of sufficient reason is, as a purely logical principle, a necessary
law of thought and to this extent cannot be disputed; but whether it is an
objective, real, metaphysical principle is another question.
[757]
There is only one plant and one animal, and these two are one. The animal
that lives off plants has its roots in the earth; thus so too does the animal
that lives off animals.
[758]
Nature has provided animals with sufficient intelligence to take care of their
self-preservation. They all know very well how to help themselves when it

Notebook J

125

comes to this important matter. Vaillant gives very good examples of this
in the way that animals behave at the approach of lions. Nature has almost
instinctively armed even man against the fear of death with the belief in
immortality.67
[761]
The hermeneutics of hypochondria.

[770]

All of our desires are merely a play of the nerves, and this circumfluent
medium does not transmit them according to my will. My fear or most
sensual desire is not capable of impeding the lightest mist of a thundercloud.
It takes the course that it must. Man is integrated with his body but not
with this world.
[775]
In this world, you can live well from soothsaying but not from truthsaying.
[787]
We are a great deal more certain that our will is free than that everything that
happens must have a cause. Could we not therefore reverse the argument for
once and say that our concepts of cause and effect must be quite incorrect,
for if they were correct, our will could not be free?
[790]
[. . .] All theory is against the freedom of the will; all experience is for it.
[. . .]68 		
[811]
There could be an ear for which all the people of the world speak only one
language.
[815]
Busts have no hands and therefore cannot steal.

[818]

The men who first invented the forgiveness of sins through Latin formulas
are guilty of the greatest corruption in the world.
[842]
There is something natural in the way we admire great warriors, as there
is in our thirst for conquest. The former corresponds to beauty and bodily
strength, the latter, to prosperity. It will, thus, never be possible to banish
these things from the world with philosophy.
[843]
Similar to what Linnaeus did for the animal kingdom, one could also
create in the realm of ideas a class called “chaos.” To this would belong

126

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

not only the great ideas of universal gravity, stardust, and immeasurable
spaces powdered with stars, but also the little protazoic ideas that attach
themselves to everything with their little tails and often live in the seeds of
great ideas, a million of which every man sees passing through his mind
if he sits still.
[850]
Since a man can go mad, I do not understand why a universal system
cannot also. This fits well for Dolomieu’s hypothesis.69
[876]
One of the strangest delusions man would be capable of is to believe he is
insane and sitting in a madhouse but actually be acting completely rational.
If someone once became convinced of this, I really do not see how one
could convince him otherwise.
[878]
In addition to time, there is another means of effecting great changes, and
that is—force. When the one moves too slowly, the other often anticipates
it.			
[880]
Conclusive solution to the riddle in the Taschen-Kalender for 1792.
There are two widows, A and B, each of whom has a grown son, a and b,
and each marries the son of the other: namely, A marries b, and B marries
a. In the marriage, each produces a daughter, α and β. These are the six
people in the grave.
2 grandmothers with their 2 granddaughters
A and B with α and β
2 husbands with their 2 wives
a and b with A and B
2 fathers with their 2 daughters
a and b with α and β
2 mothers with their 2 sons
A and B with a and b
2 maidens with their 2 mothers
α and β with A and B
2 sisters with their 2 brothers
α with her stepbrother a, and β with her stepbrother b.

Notebook J

127

A justified objection to this solution would be that if A married b, then a
would have married his mother’s mother in law; but this might be permitted
if, for example, the marriages occurred at the same time or if there were no
prohibition against such a marriage in England. Incest, however, it is not;
and it is only of this that the riddle speaks. (I have also heard this degree
is not prohibited.)
[884]
The world exists, not so we may know it, but so we may form ourselves
[898]
in it. This is a Kantian idea.
When one feels sympathy, one does not first ask other people whether one
should feel it.
[909]
He was no mathematician; for this he possessed too little mind and too
little common sense; but he was a great, masterful analytic speaker, which
one can be without possessing those qualities.
[924]
Since being slapped, when he saw a word beginning with s, such as superiors,
he always thought it was called a slap.
[925]
Xantippe, or better yet Xanthippe, actually means “blond mare.”

[930]

An ancient Greek epigram:
Παντα γελως, και παι παντα κονις, και παντα το μηδεν,
Παντα γαρ εξ ἀλογων ἐστι τα γιγνομενα.
All things of nothing sprang, from dust or smoke,
[932]
Devoid of reason all things—all a joke.70
It is a very good observation by Herr Schmid, in his Empirische Psychologie,
when he says that God and immortality are so often called upon to provide
consolation in ordinary circumstances that, at times when he alone is truly
able to offer it, it is no longer efficacious.71
[934]
The world beyond polished glasses is more important than that beyond the
ocean and is surpassed perhaps only by the one beyond the grave. [937]
Since the middle of 1791, something has been stirring in my entire economy
of thought, which I cannot yet adequately describe. I wish only to mention

128

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

one thing and give it more attention in the future. I mean the extraordinary
mistrust, which I am on the verge of committing to writing, of all human
knowledge, except mathematics; and the only thing that still ties me to
physics is the hope of discovering something beneficial to humanity. We
must think of causes and explanations because without such efforts I see
no other way to remain active. Someone can of course go on a hunt for
weeks without shooting anything, but this much is certain, at home he
certainly would not have shot anything, since only in the field does he have
the possibility, however slim it may be, of shooting something. To be sure,
we must engage in something. But is everything what we believe it to be?
I constantly ask myself: “What is existence? How do you understand it?”
Your belief that things are a certain way is certainly also something, and
regarding the rest you know nothing. This was also the time when I began
to believe (God forgive me if I am mistaken) that mussels might grow in
the mountains. It was not, however, a positive belief, but a vague sense of
our, or at least my own, inability to penetrate the secrets of nature. [938]
Related in part to the previous thought: The creature we receive most purely
from the hands of nature and which at the same time is most near to us
is us ourselves—and yet how difficult and complex is everything there! It
seems almost that we should act without making ourselves an object of
observation. The moment we make ourselves an object of observation, it is
nearly a matter of indifference whether we wish to learn the origin of the
world from the Hainberg Mountain or the nature of our soul from our
accomplishments.
[939]
The roof tile may know many things the chimney does not.

[941]

Even our frequent errors and misapprehensions have the advantage that they
accustom us to believing everything may be different from how we imagine
it. This experience too can be generalized, like the search for causes so that
in the end we arrive at a philosophy that denies even the necessity of the
principii contradictionis.72
[942]
Given our mental faculties, the two concepts of being and nonbeing are
simply impenetrable. For we do not even really know what being is, and
as soon as we venture into definitions, we must admit that something can
exist and be nowhere. Kant also says the same thing somewhere.
[943]

Notebook J

129

It is truly astonishing that we have founded our belief in God upon vague
ideas of causation; we know and can know nothing of God, for to infer that
the world must have a creator is no more than anthropomorphism. [944]
Without wit, man would really be nothing at all, for it is only the discovery
of similarities in situations that leads us to scientific knowledge; indeed,
it is only through similarities that we are able to arrange and retain. The
similarities do not lie in the things; before God, there are no similarities.
Certainly, from this follows the conclusion that the more perfect the
understanding, the more deficient the wit; or there must be faculties of
the soul that, like some scales (again wit), are so calibrated that they can
[959]
just as equally be used for exact as for rough measurements.
A golden rule: we must judge people, not by their opinions, but by what
these opinions make of them. [. . .]
[966]
Is a nation entitled to change its political constitution if it wishes to?
Regarding this question, a great deal has been said, both good and bad. I
believe the best answer is: who will prevent it once it has resolved to do
so? It is natural to act according to universal maxims; the effort can turn
out wrongly, but at least it has been made. To prevent this, the wisest must
have the upper hand; they must also be able to command a group of both
wise and unwise men equally, in order always to channel the reason of
the better ones and the obedience of the bad ones to the same end. [972]
Theories of the physical world, or earth, begin with a crude clump that
always improves, while those of morality begin with a patriarchal perfection
that always degrades. I believe that in the latter things have not fared much
better than in the former. It is not surprising that a man in a crude state
is in many respects better than a refined one; the child is also often better
than the adult.
[974]
This thought was constantly at work in his conscience like a deathwatch.
In the bustle of daily affairs it was imperceptible, but in the silence of the
night he listened with his entire soul.
[988]
I have examined the register of illnesses and did not find anxieties and
melancholy thoughts among them—this is very wrong.
[992]

130

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

He directed much hypochondriacal attention toward himself.

[996]

The tone of the voice often determines the assertion instead of the assertion
determining the tone. Even good writers, who are able to speak well,
sometimes find they have arrived unexpectedly where they really had not
wished to go.
[1005]
Aenesidemus, on Reinhold’s philosophy, is supposed to be good.73

[1006]

Things depend so strikingly much on how something is said that I believe
the most ordinary things can be said in such a way that someone else would
believe the words had come from the devil.
[1011]
Instead of saying the world is reflected in us, we should perhaps say our
reason is reflected in the world. It is a consequence of the structure of our
intellect that we cannot help but recognize order and judicious direction
in the world. But it does not follow that things really are so because we
must necessarily think they are so, for we have no conception at all of the
true nature of the external world; thus no proof of the existence of God is
possible on this basis alone. (“The difficulty of demonstrating the existence
of God through nature, in a manner that would allay all reasonable doubt,
led him to a profound investigation of our own rational being, and through
an auspicious vindication, to discover the hidden reasons that constantly
support our belief in a wise creator of this world against all doubts of
reason. And behold! He found what he was searching for. He discovered in
the necessary and immutable consciousness we have of our own power of
reason the grounds for these beliefs, the truth of which we can doubt only
if we doubt our own reason, indeed, doubt our own being.” This passage
is from an essay in the Schleswig-Braunschweig Journal, from May 1792,
entitled: “Ideas for the Estimation of Judgments regarding the Influence of
the Kantian Philosophy on the Religion of Life: An Introduction to Critical
Remarks on Reimarus’ Natural Religion.”)74
[1021]
In his optics, Priestley makes the excellent observation that the more one
knows (scire. Vere scire est per causas scire, says Bacon) about a subject, the
more quickly one is able to make an abstraction from it. Where, however,
there are still only isolated facts, one can merely make an extraction.75 [1023]
Faisceaux de causes, Deluc once said about a ray of light, namely, blended
or white light. A bundle of causes. Groups.76
[1024]

Notebook J

131

A white foam was discovered at a precipitous height, and it was unanimously
agreed that it had originated from a riding horse, and all admired the
boldness of the rider. In the end, they discovered that the schoolmaster
of the area had passed by there while taking a shortcut and had shaved
himself. 		
[1026]
It is bad enough that truth must nowadays reveal itself through fiction,
[1030]
novels, and fables.
He shoots everything down from the mobile ambush of a kind of floating
philosophy.
[1036]
It suffices for a man’s justification if he has so lived that on account of his
virtues he deserves to be forgiven his faults.
[1037]
In the May edition of the Berliner Monatschrift 1785, there is supposed to
be a shrewd argument by Kant that the unlicensed reproduction of books
is not permissible; I cannot recall having read it.77
[1038]
People laugh, and rightly so, about a man’s attempt to break his horse of the
habit of eating. Unfortunately, it died! And on precisely the day on which
his hopes were highest for finally teaching it this art. This happens not only
to the Swabians, but also to most men in becoming more intelligent. [1043]
Certainly happiness cannot be the first principle of morality, for it shows
me only the direction but not the way. Furthermore, happiness must be
subordinated to reason, for otherwise, as Pütter once demonstrated quite
well in collegio, perfice te could lead to the devil.78
[1053]
Each searches in his private world for the explanation of everything: “in
minoribus mundis et non in majore sive communi,” as Heraclitus [500
BCE] once said.79
[1066]
That God, or whatever it is, has lured man to propagate himself by making
him enjoy coitus must also be borne in mind when reflecting on Kant’s
highest principle of morality.
[1071]
It could not be avoided; man also had to create a theoretical man. This
means he had to arrange this man in the same way that he himself is
arranged, but this is perhaps as little the true man as Lesage’s theory is the

132

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

true theory, even if it can explain everything. Our adherence to the opinions
of our teachers and so forth are all practical incitements according to which
all things in nature are ordered; for this purpose, we now seek some general
principle, which may be entirely incorrect.
[1072]
A measure of cares, mensura curarum. My face is one.

[1079]

Philosophy is now, according to Kantian-Reinholdian principiis, the science
of the determinate relation of things independent of experience. One of the
best presentations of Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason is the first part of the
Contributions to the History of Philosophy by Georg Gustav Fülleborn.80
[1081]
No popery! Kein Pabst! No matter where, there are popes everywhere. [1086]
In the Tübinger gelehrte Zeitung of October 1792, I forget in which piece,
someone observes that the dispute about whether the proposition, every
triangle of equal sides has equal angles, is analytic or synthetic is merely a
dispute about words—this seems to me to be well founded. Kant says that
from merely the concepts of three, side, and equality, we cannot conclude
anything about equal angles; the concept must first be constructed. If the
triangle is thought of as constructed, then it is quite certainly merely analytic.
If such propositions were unconstructedly analytic, then the conclusion about
equal angles could be deduced from the concept of equal sides; but such a
proposition about equal sides and equal angles occurs only in the case of
triangles, and apart from that in no other figure of equal sides.81 [1091]
The limitations of human nature have hitherto been used for the purpose
of showing that it has a beginning, not merely that it is a dependent being,
which is conceivable as not having a beginning in time. Now through
experience, the cause of this beginning or much more the noncause of it is to
be accounted for apodictically. Others accept it as a matter of experience that
man, according to his being and condition, is determined by conditioned
and thus also dependent beings, which once again presuppose a ground for
their being conditioned, and that here our reason cannot give up its search
until it has posited an eternal independent being as the first cause of all
conditioned things. It is only again with reason that one can deny this is
correctly thought. But the important question is: what is thereby achieved
for the proof of the objective existence of such a being? Our reason arrives

Notebook J

133

at the idea of such a being, not because otherwise the individual experiences
of an external world would be impossible for it, but because without this
connection, in which it thinks the whole in accords with its nature, the
final bond is missing. If this conclusion is to have objective validity, it must
be shown that, without the presupposition of such a being, not only would
our representations of nature have no bearing, but nature itself and our
experience of it would not be possible;—thus we must recognize this being.
Now, since we cognize its effects only through appearances, and even the
actual grounds of these remain concealed from us, how do we expect to
decide how the essence of nature must be grounded?—This all leads to the
conclusion that this necessity, which only in speculation leads to the idea of
God, is only an inner (subjective) one, and thus only of speculative use as the
first principle of the unity of our cognition of nature. One must not tire of
saying this if one strives for the truth and not merely persuasion. It is better
that we ourselves dispute such an insecure possession than that in times
of need someone else dispossess us of it (not πμ). Schleswig-Braunschweig
Journal, July 1792, p. 282. G.C.L.82
[1098]
Burn in the name of the Lord, scald in the name of the Lord, murder and
deliver to the devil, all in the name of the Lord.
[1099]
On old and new philosophy. Previously there was a science of supersensible
objects apprehended by reason alone. Ontology was a science of the objective
predicates of real objects derived from reason alone, which sanctioned
the entire metaphysical system. Its cardinal principle was the law of
contradiction, which however proves nothing but the agreement of an idea
with its predicates but not of the idea with the objects.
[1130]
We perceive things by means of our senses. But what we perceive are not the
things themselves; the eye creates the light, and the ear, the sounds. Outside
of us, they are nothing. We lend them this. It is just the same with space
and time. Even if we cannot feel the existence of God, we cannot prove it.
All of this leads to one thing. But it is not possible to convince oneself of
this without profound reflection. I believe that in some years it is as difficult
to learn the Kantian philosophy as it is to learn to walk a tightrope. [1168]
On the nature of the empirical and the intelligible. A being other than God
could be possible that determines itself without dependence on causality.
[1173]

134

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

If a war has lasted twenty years, it may well last for a hundred. For war
has now become a status. Polemocracy. People who have tasted peace die
[1181]
out. 			
Like the Revelations of John, I have taken the explanation of gravity and
speculation about the formation of crystals to their final conclusion, and
one can believe as much of it as one wishes or can.
[1183]
Writers argue against suicide with reasons that are supposed to influence
our judgment at the critical moment. But all of this is in vain as long as
we have not discovered the reasons for ourselves, that is, as long as they are
not the fruit, the result, of the whole of our knowledge and our acquired
nature. Thus everything calls to us: strive daily after the truth; learn to know
the world; devote yourself to acquiring the companionship of honest men;
and you will always act in your best interest. And if one day you should
find that suicide is in your best interest, that is, if all of your reasons are
not sufficient to dissuade you from it, then for you suicide too is—
permitted.
[1186]
One need not endeavor to understand it, for it is not worth the effort.
This is Huygens’ estimation of the Cartesian theory of the astronomical
telescope.83
[1191]
To completely prevent an effect from occurring requires a force equal to
the cause of that effect, but to give it a new direction often requires only
something quite trivial.
[1196]
My body is that particular part of the world that my thoughts are able
to alter. Even imaginary illnesses may become real ones. In the rest of the
world, my hypotheses cannot disturb the order of things.
[1208]
Is it not peculiar that anyone can be his own physician or lawyer, but as soon
as he wishes to be his own priest, he is met with cries and lamentations,
and the gods of the earth intervene? What might be the reason the gods
of the earth concern themselves so with the eternal welfare of man, while
they are so often irresponsibly negligent of his mortal welfare? The answer
is not difficult.
[1227]
Is the situation so uncommon then in which philosophy forbids one to do
philosophy?
[1234]

Notebook J

135

If I wish to make an inference by analogy, I must necessarily assume an order
of priority between analogies, for one cannot be just as good as another.
[1259]
What does this order of analogies consist in? [. . .]
Something completely paradoxical about this that nobody could yet have
easily thought.
[1261]
To attribute a different name to something, which would have been
attributed to it in other regards, and to make inferences from this. [. . .]
[1266]
To doubt things that are now believed without any investigation, that is
everywhere the essential thing.
[1276]
Every particle could be an organic being. Geometry at any rate has nothing
to do with the organic; for this, there still is no geometry. At least our current
geometry has not yet ventured to expand this far, and if it did it would be
unsuccessful. Every particle of matter floats about in the expectation (if I
might speak this way) of becoming organic; and if it becomes organic, it
is lost to geometrical observation.
[1283]
The doctrine of the soul is like that of phlogiston.

[1306]

Why do I believe this? Is it actually this way?

[1326]

It really deserves sincerely to be investigated, for my own housekeeping,
why most discoveries happen by chance. The principle reason is really that
people learn to regard things as their teachers and acquaintances do. That
is why it would be quite useful for once to give instructions on how one
can deviate from the rule according to certain laws.
[1329]
Whenever I arrive at a new thought or theory, always to ask: Is this really
as new as you believe it to be? This is also in general the best reminder
[1341]
never to be amazed at anything in the world (nil admirari).
Our entire morality and religion belong to the dynamics I spoke of elsewhere.
Newton says at the end of his famous Queastionen in his Optics: the more
we learn to know about the order of this world, the more we learn to know
God (or whatever it is that each may and finally must call God πμ) and
thus the more we learn to do his will just as surely as salt crystallizes. These

136

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

things do his will without knowing it. Man does it with the feeling he calls
consciousness and moreover with the feeling he could also not have carried
out this will if he had wished, just as we believe the wind that blows today
could also not have blown today.
[1350]
Nothing in the world is so difficult as to make the conditions in experiments
[1357]
sufficiently identical. [. . .]
Our artificial systems in the natural sciences are certainly not the best; we
choose them only because we lack a natural system. But even someone who
believes all artificial systems are false must concede that if ever a natural
system arises, it will certainly be thanks to the indefatigable industriousness
with which people worked on the artificial ones. This is also quite true of
hypotheses, yet people now deny their usefulness.
[1360]
To seek to see in everything something no one has yet seen or thought.
[1363]
To ask in everything the question: is this true? and then to seek reasons for
why one believes it is not true.
[1389]
The reason I admire Herr Lesage’s theory so much is primarily because by
supporting itself with analogy and geometry, it tidies things up for us and
encompasses the furthest circles of our knowledge—it gathers up all the little
particular hypothetical amusements and makes all further dreams useless. If
it is a dream, then it is the greatest and most sublime that has ever been
dreamed and one with which we can fill the tiny holes in our books that
could only be filled by a dream. And if this dream is internally coherent,
if it never departs from the rules of correct analogy, then it could be truth
itself or at least take its place. He teaches in models as one preaches in
analogies. Indeed, the deaf-mute learns to speak with tones that he himself
does not hear, being led by what he sees to imitate the movement of the
speaking muscles. [. . .]
[1416]
Regarding the indiscernibles and imponderables in nature, Lucretius is quite
fitting: “Corporibus caecis igitur natura gerit res” (De rerum natura, 1.328).84
[1420]
Has anyone ever dreamed of scents for which there was no external cause,
I mean, for example, the scent of roses at a time when the scent of rose or

Notebook J

137

rosewater could not reach the nose? This is certainly the case with music
and light as well; only the sensations of pain in dreams commonly have an
[1465]
external cause, but I am uncertain about scents.
On Lesage. I would very much like to know whether it is better to be stalled
with an obscure word or to posit causes using analogies that through their
ingenious expression put us finally at ease. Nothing in the world can bring
us to a standstill quicker so that we are no longer in the position even to
think of a plausible hypothesis, as, for example, occurs with questions about
the origin of motion or the origin of things.
[1483]
God, this great qualitas occulta.

[1485]

Man is a masterpiece of creation if for no other reason than that, despite
all evidence of determinism, he believes he acts with free will.
[1491]
Lesage’s Hypothesis: To assume that all of this is inexplicable is itself a
hypothesis, such as that which the common man holds regarding things
that the scholar can explain. To say that it is uncertain is also a hypothesis;
or it is meaningless, for what in the whole of natural sciences can we be
completely certain about?
[1502]
Hypotheses—conjectures by analogy with what is already agreed upon.
[1520]
Someone who accumulates mere observations and experiments seems to me
like a person who keeps a register of the pieces that two chess players pick
up, put down, and remove. Someone who notices which movements they
are making is much more advanced. It would cost him not a little time
precisely to account for the laws of movement; indeed, he would expend
a great deal of time before deducing the reason why all of the movements
are being undertaken and that the purpose of it all was to capture the king.
Without hypotheses of this sort, nothing can be ordered. The question as to
their usefulness has something absurd about it, for we would like to explain
the phenomena in nature, and such a hypothesis is nothing more than a
bold explanation that gets a knock on the head as soon as the phenomena
contradict it. The question of the usefulness of false hypotheses also answers
itself: not everyone is capable of immediately arriving at the best one. Not
only are they found in the natural sciences, but Turenne and Friedrich II
followed them in their endeavors as much as Newton. L’hombre cannot be

138

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

played without hypotheses, and the finest players venture them most often.
When the false ones are rebutted, there is always another one that is seldom
any worse.85
[1521]
Movement in nature appears to be not so much purpose as means. Space
is the vehiculum of movement through which we come to know everything.
[1523]
It is strange that only extraordinary people make the discoveries that
afterward seem so easy and simple; this presupposes that to perceive the
most simple but true conditions of things requires very profound knowledge.
[1529]
How do we arrive at the concept outside us? Why do we not believe that
everything is within us and occurs within us? How is it that we arrive at the
concept of distance at all? This seems quite difficult to resolve. We go as far
as to locate that which is in us and occurs within us, namely, the changes
of the images on our retina, outside ourselves, and yet when we are pricked
or feel a pain in the eye, we immediately locate it in the eye itself. [1532]
A man of spirit must not think of the word difficulty as even existing. Away
with it! 		
[1534]
In observations, the difficulties are objective and subjective irregularities. We
[1536]
can consider the latter objective and assess accordingly.
Outside us. It is certainly difficult to say how we arrived at this concept,
for we actually merely sense things within us. To sense something outside
oneself is a contradiction; we sense things only within ourselves, and what
we sense is a mere modification of our self and thus within us. Because these
alterations are not dependent upon us, we ascribe them to other things that
are outside us and say that there are things we should call “praeter nos”; but
for praeter we substitute the preposition extra, which is something entirely
different. That we think of these things as being in a space outside us is
clearly not a matter of sensation; it seems to be something that is most
intimately interwoven with the nature of our sensible faculty of cognition;
it is the form in which the representation of something praeter nos is given
to us. The form of sensibility.
[1537]

Notebook J

139

Could our belief that we act freely, although we are actually machines, not
also be a form of our understanding? It is entirely impossible for us to
observe the initial act of coming into being; we everywhere observe only
what has happened, not how it has happened; when we believe we are now
doing something, it has really already been done.
[1538]
Although the concept of antiperistasis has been banished from physics, it
[1541]
nevertheless still finds a place in ethics.
In sound, there is nothing that corresponds to black in colors. Deathly
silence might be called black. An interval is black.
[1543]
In physics, it is just as with the genealogies of the Bible: he was the son;
he was the son, and he was the son of Adam, and he was the son of God.
[1548]
In the itinerant wanderings and expeditions of the imagination, we often
scare up game that methodical philosophy can make use of in its wellordered household.
[1550]
Man is a creature who searches for causes; in a hierarchy of minds, he could
be called a “cause-seeker.” Other minds perhaps conceive of things according
to different relations that to us are incomprehensible.
[1551]
A good method of discovery is to imagine certain members of a system
removed and then see how the rest would behave: for example, if the world
were without iron, where would we be? This is an old example.
[1571]
The more experiences and experiments we accumulate in the investigation
of nature, the more precarious the theories become. But it is not always
good to give them up immediately on this account. For every sound
hypothesis was useful for synthesizing and retaining previous phenomena.
We should document contradictory experiences separately until enough have
[1602]
accumulated to make erecting a new structure worthwhile.
Wit is the finder, and understanding, the observer.

[1620]

To invent an inventor for all things.

[1621]

140

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

Is this really the only way of explaining this?

[1639]

Seeing black is not the same as seeing nothing. Someone who has no eyes
does not see everything around himself as black but does not see at all. We
do not see black with our ears but do not see at all. Black then is seen or
sensed to a certain degree; it is the feeling of tranquility for a sense engaged
[1651]
by light.
It cannot be proven whether animals perceive things in space and time, for
regardless of whether they act in accordance with their perceptions, it would
all the same appear to us as though they were acting according to space
and time. This is also the case with the actions of those born blind. [1664]
To seek everything on a grand scale that we observe on a small scale and
vice versa. For example, all that a child says and does the adult certainly also
does in other things in which he is and remains a child; for we are after
all only children of an advanced age. This lesson is put quite generally, but
the man of experience will certainly understand how to give it the sense he
knows I intend. We no longer strike the table after bumping into it; but
for different yet similar bumps we have created the word fate, which we
know to curse.
[1666]
In a land where snow never falls on the planes, there is a towering,
insurmountable, snow-covered peak upon which the inhabitants can
gaze. What hypotheses the physicists would not propose to explain this
phenomenon: flowers, mold, or foam caused by the flow of the water.
Phosphorescence—a fable about the craters on the moon.
[1739]
We might explain nature as Minellius did Virgil, but also as Heyne did:
with a painstaking view that does not extend beyond grammar, but also with
a comprehensive view that encompasses the entire age and human nature.
The view of an apothecary.86
[1758]
For the banishment of empirical comparisons it is admittedly too soon, but
we must always create refuges for this purpose.
[1760]
Is a complete revolution possible in this?

[1773]

These theories are artificial systems that have their value always in absence
of a natural one.
[1774]

Notebook J

141

It would have been quite simple for the heavens to grant us a sense that
would immediately indicate the distance of objects from us, just as our
ear, so to speak, counts the vibrations of strings. Just as light indicates
the positions of objects only according to its path, a sense would be quite
possible that would indicate distance immediately. The distances of objects
are always only inferred.
[1782]
What odd chatter there would be in the world if we were to transform the
[1806]
names of things into definitions!
When I press my hand on my eyes, I see suns, electrical figures, and the
most beautiful patterns. When I remove my hand and open my eyes, I see a
tree and roof tiles—what is now doing what my hand previously did? [1817]
If we assume that all our representations are a kind of mania, a state of
madness, there must then be some being who has this as its purpose. The
mad are severed threads who do not follow the spool in the weaving of a
tapestry. In them, we find the work of God. They are also considered holy
among some peoples. The mad give us a view into the economy of the
whole, which we would otherwise not have. They are the compressed eye
that produces electrical figures, suns, and patterns.
[1818]
The moment we assume a primitive state of the earth, whatever it might be,
we assume something naturally. To assume something is, however, always a
kind of prophecy, like soothsaying, for we can never know what the earth
was in the beginning—and what is in the beginning? What do these words
mean?
[1819]
As long as we do not know how animals originate and develop, we also
cannot know whether mussels did not originate in the mountains. [1820]
Richter once said to me that physicians should not say: “I cured him,” but,
“he did not die at my hands.” Likewise in physics, one could also say, “I
have attributed to it causes whose absurdity in the end no one will be able
to demonstrate,” instead of saying, “I have explained it.”87
[1827]
Of what type is this, or in what does the type to which it belongs consist?
[1836]
I also believe that strictly understood there is for humans only a single
science, and it is pure mathematics. For this we need nothing more than

142

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

our mind, our self; and indeed, we need this self even for our existence.
Yet to believe for this reason that mathematics is absolutely necessary for
physics is foolish, for where this actually happens, man has already made
the best discoveries. It should be brought to a point where it can be left
to the mathematician, yet I believe that the first mathematical people saw
more of the mathematical in things than was really there. This, I think, is
[1841]
also an idea from Kant, but I am not certain.
We seek everywhere in nature a certain determination, yet all this is nothing
more than an ordering of the obscure feeling of our own determination. All
mathematical laws we discover in nature are, despite their beauty, always
suspect to me. They bring me no joy. They are merely for utility. In close
proximity, nothing is true.
[1843]
Might there not occur in other bodies something analogous to fantasy and
creativity in our own? How might our brain appear if we could observe
the changes brought about in its texture by thoughts?
[1854]
In the world and in the realm of truth, we must investigate freely and not
concern ourselves with whether a proposition belongs to a family of which
some members might be dangerous. The power involved here can be useful
elsewhere as well.
[1857]
Is this the real cause as we commonly believe, or is there still more to it?
[1884]
We cannot too often bear in mind that all application of mathematics
to physics is valid always only in the sense in which what is claimed to
be true of mathematical objects is also true of physical ones. The ideas
of mathematicians, like the law of refraction or the effect of gravity, are
pure ideas, which certainly do not occur in nature in the form in which
the mathematician represents them. This is how things are. Already with
the concept of a body, the mathematician differs from the physicist; how
then can he with any right insist upon further agreement? They are all his
assumptions.
[1908]
To no longer use in physics compendia the word theory regarding fire,
electricity, magnetism, and many others, but instead to use fact and
speculation; manner of representing.
[2021]

Notebook J

143

Since we have no sensation of magnetic forces, it could also even be the
effect of a physical body that is not an object of our senses. [. . .] [2040]
Above all, to expand the frontiers of science; without this, all is for nothing.
[2041]
Just once to try on Kantian philosophy with my so-called metempsychosis.
[2043]
What have we done?
What are we now doing?
What else should we do?

[2076]

Would it not be a good idea at the beginning of our physics books to teach
about our senses in general, where we can prepare for expressions such as
latency. We encounter numerous effects in nature whose causes we cannot
sense: the cause of gravity, of magnetic material. Consider how light would
appear to us if we had no eyes.
[2078]
Do not say hypothesis, and even less theory; say way of representing. [2093]
It is common to rebuke the phlogiston theorists because they cannot agree,
since one understands this by phlogiston and another that, and thus that
they themselves do not understand what they mean. This is even used as
an argument against the existence of phlogiston. To my mind, we could
reverse the argument and say that it is precisely because there are so many
opinions that there must be something else there in addition to fire and air
and that it is very probable that some such thing exists. Similar conclusions
have been drawn from the common belief in a god or the soul. (Even the
fact that people pray to idols proves there is a god.)
[2134]
The philosopher cannot proceed cautiously enough in his supposition of
matter. What we explain according to matter and even fluids could be
nothing more than transcendental affinities. That I see a physical body,
and it addresses my substance, and that it does this from a great distance
when the sun is over the horizon, is heightened affinity. A ball in the dark
still addresses itself to my sensations. For how objects outside me affect my
faculty of cognition, I do not know. There are properties of these objects
outside of us through which they are able to modify our sensing substance.

144

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

That the sensation of this modification is not the thing itself is no doubt
very clear. The vibration of the air first becomes a sound where there is
an ear. Accordingly, our senses would be nothing more than instruments
through which the affinities of physical bodies can become representations
in us. 		
[2147]
However we wish to put it, philosophy is always the art of analysis.
The peasant uses all the principles and propositions of the most abstract
philosophy, only in a way that is enveloped, indirect, compounded, or
latent, as the physicist or chemist might say; the philosopher gives us pure
[2148]
propositions.
We see in nature not words but only the initial letters of words, and when
we wish to read, we discover that the so-called new words are in turn merely
the initial letters of others.
[2154]

Notebook K
1793–1796

The greater and more ambitious the plan is into which a revolution fits, the
more suffering it inflicts upon those involved, for not everyone is capable
of strengthening his patience by appealing to reason, even if he has a clear
view of the whole, and this much less so if he is uncertain that he will still
be there to enjoy the fruits. But precisely this same shortsightedness, which
makes man incapable of surveying the grand plan of providence, prevents
even the wisest governments from attaining their great goals by the peaceful
roads they so rightly embark upon. Indeed, since it is a natural duty always
to choose only what we believe to be right, it is impossible to embark
upon a road that will lead to the improvement of the world but will make
millions miserable in the present. Man is here to cultivate only the surface
of the earth, and nature reserves for herself the cultivation and repair that
go deeper beneath the surface. Such cultivation has not been entrusted to
man. He cannot cause earthquakes that devastate cities, and if he could,
he would surely cause them in the wrong places. I am inclined to believe
that the same is true of our—archies and our—cracies. What the plow and
the axe can do is what we can and must do—but not what belongs to
the earthquakes, floods, and hurricanes, though this is presumably, even
certainly, just as useful and necessary. If ultimately the fortune of our entire
species rests on some . . . cracy, whose prefix we do not know, and like
mathematicians must simply call an x-ocracy, who wishes to assign this x a
value? A friend suggested Christocracy, and from the depths of my soul I
have no objection to this value for x, if only we could for once agree on the
meaning of the word Christ or if we did not willfully misconstrue its clear
meaning. I fear, however, that even this understanding could be brought
about only through reformatory revolutions or a thirty years’ war.
[16]

145

146

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

If a higher being were ever to tell us how the world came into existence, I
would much like to know whether we would be in a position to understand
him. I believe we would not be. Regarding the act of coming into existence,
there would hardly be any mention, for this is mere anthropomorphism. It
might even be that outside of our minds there is nothing that corresponds
to our concept of coming into existence once it is applied, not to relations
among things but to things in themselves.
[18]
Much is being written nowadays on nomenclature and correct designation,
and this is quite right; it must all be considered and the best results obtained.
Yet I believe that we expect too much from it and are too anxious to give
things names that express their nature. It seems to me that the immeasurable
advantage that language brings to thinking consists in the fact that words
are signs for things rather than definitions. Indeed, I believe it is precisely
in providing definitions that the usefulness of language is in part annulled.
To determine what things are is the task of philosophy. A word should
be, not a definition, but only a sign for a definition, which itself is always
the variable result of the collective effort of researchers; and it will always
remain so in countless objects of our thinking that the thinker will become
accustomed no longer to regarding the sign as a definition and will in the
end unwittingly transfer this lack of meaning even to those signs that are
genuine definitions. And I think this too is quite right. For since the signs
for concepts cannot be definitions, it is almost better not to allow any of
them to be definitions than, on the reputation of a few signs that are genuine
definitions, to give false credit to so many others that are not. This would
produce a dominance of language over meaning that would rob us of all
the advantages provided by the signs. But this need not worry us; left to
itself, reason will always take words for what they are.—Such a defining
word accomplishes incredibly little. For a word cannot contain everything,
and thus I still must get to know the thing itself better separately. The best
word is one that everybody understands immediately. We should therefore
be careful about discarding words that are universally understood and not
toss them aside on the grounds that they might present a false conception
of a thing! For, in the first place, it is not true that such a word gives me
a false conception since of course I know and take for granted that the
word serves merely to identify the thing, and, in the second place, I have
no wish to learn the nature or essence of a thing from the word. Who has
ever thought of metal calx at the mention of calx? What harm can there
be in calling comets comets, that is, long-haired stars, and what use would
there be in calling them flaming or steaming stars? (or shooting or falling

Notebook K

147

stars for that matter). It is seldom that much can be introduced into a
name, so that one must in any case know the thing first. Parabola, hyperbola,
ellipse are the kinds of names of which chemistry can hardly boast, for they
express properties of lines from which all other properties can be derived;
but this is certainly to be attributed more to the pure nature of the science
to which these observations belong than to any particular cleverness on the
part of the originators of these names. Yet of what use is this wisdom? We
employ them just as we do the names circle and ring or conchoid, which are
not definitions at all. This dispute has much in common with the purist
endeavors of the language reformers and orthographers. Too much is expected
of good words and feared from bad ones. It is not only the correctness but
also the familiarity of an expression that is important, and the value of a
word to a certain extent consists in the proportion in which correctness
and familiarity are combined whenever it is used. To establish rules for the
creation of words is certainly always a good idea, for a time might come
when they are needed. It really is best to give things Greek names. If all of
the names in chemistry were Hebrew or Arabic, such as alkali etc., then
the less one understood of the names, the better one would fare.88 [19]
Nomenclature. Here too a limited monarchy is preferable to an aristocracy. If
we wish to grant validity only to rationally selected expressions, we will have
an aristocracy, and then the question will be: which are the most rational,
and who is to decide this? Indeed, many expressions might be selected
that are all equally good and equally rational. Here too I consider a carved
monarch the best monarch, for carved saints accomplish more than living
ones. In the reformation of accepted words, vanity always plays a greater
role than utility, for usually the new words become useful only when we
understand them and take them for granted as we did the old ones, that is,
when we no longer think of the nature of the things they designate but only
of the things themselves. Hypotheses are expert opinions; nomenclatures are
mandates.
[20]
Nomenclature. I always think it best not to reform at all. It arouses animosity,
envy, and disdain, and too much is written about names that is really of no
value. The senseless disappears of its own accord, and that which nature
rejects does not grow again.
[21]
Previously my head (my brain) recorded everything I heard and saw; now
it no longer records things in this way and instead leaves it to me. Who is
this I? Am I and the writer not the same?
[38]

148

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

In his Letters on Different Subjects in Natural Philosophy (Vol. 2, Pg. 228),
Euler says there would still be thunder and lightning even if there were
nobody present for the lightning to strike. It is an entirely common
expression, but I must admit that it has never been easy for me completely
to grasp it. It always seems to me that the concept being is something
borrowed from our thinking and that if there were no longer any perceiving
and thinking beings, there would also no longer be anything. As simple as
this might sound and as ridiculed as I might be if I expressed it publicly,
I consider the ability to speculate about such things to be one of the greatest
virtues, indeed one of the most unique abilities of the human mind. This is
related again to my idea of metempsychosis. I think, actually, I sense very
much in this that I am not in a position to express, for it is not something
common for humans, and thus our language is not made for it. God grant
that it does not one day drive me mad. I realize this much: if I wished
to write about it, the world would consider me a fool, and thus I remain
silent. It is as difficult to communicate this as it would be to play the spots
on my table on a violin.89
[45]
Nothing pains me more in all that I do and do not do as much as the
fact that I must see the world as the ordinary man does even though as a
scientist I know he sees it falsely.
[46]
Where foresight was of no use, I possessed it, but where it could have been
of use I was foolish: when the time comes I will know what to do, I thought,
and did nothing. This is a disposition far more common than we think. [47]
Even if my philosophy is not sufficient to discover anything new, it
nevertheless possesses courage enough to regard as questionable what has
long been believed true.
[49]
Oh! Those were the good days when I still believed everything I heard. [50]
I cannot rid myself of the idea that I died before I was born and that
through death I will return again to that previous state. It is in many
respects fortunate that this idea cannot clearly be comprehended. Even if
it were possible for man to speculate about this riddle of nature, it would
be very much against his interest to be able to prove it. To die and become
animate again with the memory of one’s previous existence, we call being

Notebook K

149

unconscious; to wake again with different organs that require development,
[54]
we call being born.
It is quite amazing the varied levels of instruction afforded us by our
faculties, from the most indistinct presentiments to the clear insights of
the understanding. It is a favorite endeavor of mine to analyze them. Nearly
every contemplation is preceded by a certain decisive feeling, which in a
felicitously constituted mind seldom deceives, and is subsequently merely
ratified by the understanding. Perhaps animals are led only through such
intuitions.
[63]
Perhaps we can imagine the matter this way: we possess a capacity for receiving impressions, which is sensibility. Through this we become conscious of
the modifications that occur within us; the cause of these modifications we
call objects. Yet we ourselves are not only these objects. We sense modifications and impressions within us the ground for which we seek also within
us because we are conscious of the fact that they are dependent upon us or
are within us. In this way, we are conscious of the state of our soul at every
moment. This capacity is inner sense. When I say something occurs within
me, I am experiencing it with inner sense. There is a feeling of attention,
spontaneity. Here we ourselves are object and observer, object and subject.
And yet there are also impressions regarding which we sense in an
overwhelmingly convincing way that we are merely a receptive subject but
are nothing less than an object. Perhaps it would be enough to say here that
such objects are praeter nos, something distinct from us—this, we should
think, is the only thing we are capable of sensing. But that this praeter
nos is transformed into an extra nos, which we do and must then associate
with distance from us in space, seems to be a necessary requirement of our
nature. Since this representation carries with it necessity, it cannot come
from experience, for no empirical proposition implies necessity. Indeed, we
must even think of space as infinite. How could we experience such a thing?
It is impossible. Thus I believe that if any proposition is independent of all
experience, it is the proposition regarding the extension of bodies.
Here then arises another question, and I cannot say if it has yet been
answered: if bodies are granted objective reality, and properties are attributed
to them, then given a countless number of cases, one would be possible
in which the object has those properties that we, according to our nature,
must attribute to it. This is so not because it has these properties, but

150

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

because given the countless possible forms of intuition also this agreement
would be possible. This would also be a harmonia praestabilita. Yet here
it is also a question whether it is permissible to ask if an object can be
that which it appears to be for another. This entire question is once again
anthropomorphism. For how beings that sense and think can be affected by
objects outside of them is something we do not and cannot know. Given
this state of things, the smartest thing we can do is to remain with ourselves
in order to observe our modifications and not at all to concern ourselves
with the nature of things in themselves.
Just as it is with space for so-called external objects, so it is with time
for the objects of inner sense. We view modifications in ourselves under the
form of duration, succession, simultaneity etc.90
[64]
What makes the study of a profound philosophy so difficult is that in
everyday life we regard a host of things as being so natural and simple
that we believe it would not be possible for them to be any different, yet
we have to recognize that we must first accept that these supposed trivial
things are of great importance in order then to explain what is pronounced
difficult about them. When I say: this stone is hard—thus first associate the
concept stone, to which many things can be attributed, with this individuo,
then speak of its hardness, and then go on to unite this being hard with
the stone—this is such a miracle of an operation that it is a question
whether so much has been exerted on the production of entire books.
“But are these not subtleties? Does one need to know this?”—Regarding
the first question: they are not subtleties, for it is precisely in these simple
cases that we must get to know the operations of the understanding. If we
wish to do this first with complex things, then all of our effort will be in
vain. To find these simple things difficult reveals no marginal progress in
philosophy.—Regarding the second question, however, I reply: No! You do
not need to know it, but neither do you need to be a philosopher. [65]
Very few people indeed have ever really contemplated the meaning of
nonexistence. The nonexistence following death, I imagine as the state in
which I was before being born. It is not really apathy, for that may still be
felt; it is, rather, nothing at all. When I arrive at this state,—though the
words I and state are no longer appropriate here—, it is, I believe, something
that is wholly a counterbalance to eternal life. Regarding sentient beings,
nonexistence is not opposed to existence but to supreme bliss. I believe one

Notebook K

151

would be equally well off whatever state one is in. But because we do not
comprehend the whole, it is our duty to act according to reason, to live
[66]
and to wait.
What is really singular seldom remains unexplained for long. What is
inexplicable is usually no longer really singular and perhaps never has been.
[67]
The understanding grasps theory quite well; judicium decides its application.
Very many people are lacking in the latter quality, and frequently the greatest
scholars and theorists lack it most of all.
[68]
Already many years ago, I thought our world might be the work of some
inferior being, and I still cannot rid myself of this idea. It is foolish to think
that a world with no sickness, no pain, and no death is impossible. Indeed,
we imagine heaven in this way. To talk of a time of probation, of gradual
perfection, is to think of God in human terms and is mere chatter. Why
should there not be a gradation of beings up to God, and our world—I
mean our solar system and the entire star cluster ending with the Milky
Way—be the work of one who did not properly understand things, an
experiment? The nebulae observed by Herschel are perhaps nothing more
than admitted specimens or works in progress. When I witness war, hunger,
poverty, and pestilence, I find it impossible to believe this is all the work of
a supremely wise being. Or perhaps some matter independent of this being
was created, and some degree of limitation was introduced so that this world
became only relatively the best one, as indeed has often been taught. [69]
If we regard nature as a teacher and poor mortals as her pupils, we are
inclined to make room for an altogether extraordinary idea about the human
race. We are sitting all together in a class and possess all of the principles
necessary for understanding what is said, yet we pay more attention to
the chatter of other pupils than to the teacher’s lessons. And indeed when
someone next to us does take notes, we cheat from him, stealing some
remark that he himself perhaps indistinctly heard and supplementing it
with our own orthographic and intellectual errors.
[70]
Every degree of knowledge has a number of viable propositions in regard
to which we do not notice that they levitate without further support on

152

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

mere conjecture beyond what is comprehensible. We possess them without
knowing whence the certainty comes with which we trust them. The
philosopher has them no less than the man who believes that water flows
always downhill because it would be impossible for it to flow uphill. [71]
With the prerogatives of beauty and those of happiness, the matter is quite
different. To enjoy the advantages of beauty in this world, other people
must believe that we are beautiful; yet in the case of happiness, this is not
[72]
necessary, for it is perfectly sufficient that we ourselves believe it.
One of the greatest supports for Kantian philosophy is the certain truth
of the observation that indeed we ourselves are as much something as the
objects outside of us. Thus whenever anything affects us, the effect depends
not only on the thing producing the effect but also on that upon which
the effect is produced. As in collisions, both bodies are at once active and
passive, for it is impossible for one thing to be acted upon by another
without the overall effect appearing compound. I should think then that
in this sense a pure tabula rasa is impossible, for in every action or effect
the agent is modified and what it loses the other gains and vice versa. [74]
We become conscious of certain representations that are not dependent
upon us; others, at least we believe, are dependent upon us; where is the
boundary? We know only the existence of our sensations, representations,
and thoughts. It thinks, we should say, just as one says, it lightnings. To say
cogito is already too much if we translate it as I think. To assume the I, to
postulate it, is a practical necessity.91
[76]
What does it mean to think in the spirit of Kant? I believe it means to
discover what relationships obtain between our being, whatever it might
be, and those things we say are outside us; that is to say, to determine the
relationship of the subjective to the objective. This has certainly always been
the goal of all thorough natural scientists; the question is whether they have
undertaken it in so truly a philosophical way as Herr Kant. One has taken
things to be objective that indeed are and must be subjective.
[77]
I find that theorizing is excusable, for it is an impulse of the soul that can
be useful to us as soon as we have accumulated sufficient experience. Thus
all our current follies of theorizing could be impulses that will find their
application only in the future.
[78]

Notebook K

153

Man is to be found in reason, God in the passions. I believe Pope has
already said something similar.92
[79]
Is it not strange that belief can become stronger than reason? And is it not
the question which of them has more right to direct our actions since both
direct them with equal strength when they begin to govern?
[80]
It is impossible to see how far anthropomorphism may not extend, taking
the word in its widest sense. People revenge themselves on the dead; bones
are exhumed and dishonored; we empathize with inanimate things—indeed,
someone once mourned for a clock when it stopped because of the cold.
This transference of our own feelings and perceptions to others prevails
everywhere in such a variety of forms that it is not always easy to identify.
[83]
Perhaps all pronouns regarding the other have such an origin.
What might be the reason for the singular phenomenon, which I have so
often noticed, of speaking to someone in a dream about a third party and
then upon awakening discovering that the supposed third party is the very
person with whom we were speaking? Is it perhaps a mere form given by
awaking, or what might be the reason?
[84]
Since in dreams we so often take our own objections for those of another,
as for example when we dispute with someone, it surprises me that the
same does not occur more often when we are awake. The state of being
awake seems primarily to consist in our making a sharp and conventional
distinction between what is in us and outside us.
[85]
Why can we not wean ourselves from sleep? Considering the most important
functions of life proceed without interruption and the organs through which
this occurs, like the heart, bowels, and lymphatic system never rest or sleep,
it would seem that sleep is not at all necessary. Those organs then of which
the soul has most need for its functioning are interrupted in their activity.
I would much like to know whether sleep has ever been considered in this
regard. Why do we sleep? Sleep seems to me to be more a relaxation of
the organs of thought than anything else. If a person were not to exhaust
himself physically in the least but to do his business according to his utmost
comfort, he would in the end still become sleepy. This at least is a manifest
indication that while we are awake more is expended than earned, and
as experience teaches us, this deficiency cannot be compensated for while

154

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

awake. What does this mean? What is man while he sleeps? He is a mere
plant; thus man must for a time becomes a plant so that for a few hours
during the day he may represent the masterpiece of creation. Has anyone
yet considered sleep as a state connecting us with plants? History contains
only accounts of waking people; but should we regard those of the sleeping
less important? True, man does little in that state, but it is precisely here
that the waking psychologist has the most to do.
At their extremities the nerves become pointed and constitute what
we call “organs of sense.” The extremities are directed outward and receive
impressions of the outside world. These presumably are at work without
our knowledge and are continually awake. If we consider man from the
extremities of the nerve fibers to his interior, there is a stratum constantly at
work; and presumably while occupied with the transmission of impressions
to the soul, this stratum cannot at the same time be occupied in maintaining
itself and replacing what has been expended. Thus these parts are left to rest
during the time of restoration. We appear to feel only while functioning,
not while we are accumulating the means to do so. What we sense in this
case is perhaps only the sensation of well-being; it does not become an idea
but is the mere feeling of strength or even comfort.
Our entire history is merely the history of the waking life of man;
nobody has yet considered the history of his sleeping life. Our organs of
thought appear to be fatigued most easily; they are the most acute nerve
extremities. Thus during healthy sleep we do not think at all. To recapitulate:
in the most sensitive nerve extremities, exertion and restoration appear to
counteract one another; when the nerves are being restored, there is an absence
of sensation. Those parts located nearer the interior are merely for sustenance,
not for transmission and reaction. In this way, the necessity of sleep might be
demonstrated a priori. Sensitive parts that must be restored by coarser ones
are unable to fulfill their duties while they are undergoing this repair. [86]
The sure conviction that we could if we wanted to is the reason some good
minds are idle—and this is not without its reasons.
[87]
We cannot show with more certainty that a particular character is a person’s
true one than by showing that the opposite would make everyone laugh.
[89]
Even the uncertainty in which we find ourselves about certain objects is
sometimes useful. Through this, hope acquires great latitude, and we always
hold for true what is most appropriate to our situation. [94]

Notebook K

155

I am convinced there are spectacles for the powers of the mind just as there
[96]
are for the eyes. [. . .]
It is certainly better not to have studied a subject at all than to have studied
it superficially. For when healthy common sense makes a judgment about
something it does not go so far astray as a little erudition does.
[98]
I am utterly convinced man possesses all knowledge necessary to make
him happy. Yet it also seems to me probable that human happiness as such
contributes little to the well-being of the whole. What man contributes
to the whole is hardly subject to his will or choice. What of it does he
comprehend? When he is of use in the exercise of his will, even this will is
mechanical, and we are merely disputing about words. Whoever contributes
through his will to the benefit of the whole must comprehend the whole.
But man cannot do this; thus, with respect to the whole, it is not a matter
of freedom. Absolute freedom is here a contradiction. If he has achieved
freedom within a certain horizon, it is also merely mechanical and is like
the freedom of a man who turns the treadwheel of a crane. I believe when
man binds himself to the great chain of things he is not free; he does not
even know that he is contributing.
[99]
[. . .] If God proclaimed the secrets of men, the world could not endure.
It would be as if you could see other people’s thoughts. [. . .]
[100]
To make a vow is a greater sin than to break one.

[105]

It is a danger to the perfection of our spirit to receive acclaim for deeds that
did not demand the entirety of our powers. Thereafter one usually comes
to a standstill. Rochefoucauld thus believes no man has ever yet done all
of which he was capable; I believe this is true for most. Every human soul
has its portion of indolence, which disposes it most often to do what is
easiest for it.93
[111]
Do people blush with shame in the dark? That people become pale with
fright in the dark, I believe, but not that they blush with shame. For they
become pale on their own account, but they blush on account of themselves
as well as others.—The question whether women blush in the dark is a
very difficult one, at least one that cannot be answered with the lights on.
[115]

156

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

I do not believe that so-called truly pious people are good because they are
pious but pious because they are good. There are certain characters for whom
it is natural to reconcile themselves with the circumstances of domestic and
civil life and to make the best of things of which they partly see the use
and partly recognize the impossibility of improving. Thus to ascribe this to
religion may well be a fallacia causae.94
[117]
He was one of those who wants to do everything better than one requires.
[120]
This is a loathsome quality in a servant.
The rabble can never, or only seldom, be persuaded. Through the cunning
guidance of their superstitions, they can, however, still be led to do good
deeds. We scare children, whom we cannot persuade, with the figure of a
black man or a chimneysweep. Saint Januarius of Naples is nothing more
than this. Here again is the series whose polar members seem no longer to
belong together.95
[121]
If you really want to see what man is capable of if he so desires, you need
only think of those people who have escaped or tried to escape from prison.
They accomplished as much with a single nail as they could have with a
battering ram.
[124]
First we must believe, and then we believe.

[136]

To establish liberty and equality as many people now think of them would
mean to declare an eleventh commandment through which the other ten
would be abolished.
[153]
There is, I believe, no question that despite all inequality of rank all men
can be equally happy; we need only seek to make everyone as happy as
possible.
[160]
As long as our memory lasts, a multitude of individuals work together united
as one: the twenty year old, the thirty year old, and so on. But as soon as
it fails, we come to stand more and more alone, and the whole generation
of I’s withdraws and sneers at the feeble old man. [. . .]
[162]
What I dislike about the method of treating history is that intention is seen
in every action, and every event is attributed to some intention. This is truly

Notebook K

157

quite wrong. The greatest events occur without any intention; chance makes
good of mistakes and expands the most cleverly planned undertaking. The
[170]
greatest events in the world are not produced; they happen.
In this world, one can hardly find a stranger ware than books: they are
printed by people who do not understand them; sold by people who do
not understand them; bound, reviewed, and read by people who do not
understand them; and now they are even written by people who do not
understand them.
[172]
Would it not be much better for the human race if we no longer had any
history at all, or at least no political history? Men would act more in accord
with the powers they possess on each occasion; but now, for every man who
is improved by an example, a thousand are made worse.—All this for the
proprium locum.96
[176]
Of all the chapters that the pleasant chatterer Montaigne left to us, I enjoyed
the one about death, notwithstanding all of the excellent thoughts contained
therein, the least of all. It is the nineteenth chapter of the first book. One
can see through it all that the brave philosopher feared death; and with
the violent anxiety with which he shifts his thoughts, even turning them
to plays on words, he makes a quite bad example. Whoever really does not
fear death would unlikely know how to speak against it with as many little
reasons for consolation as Montaigne presents here.97
[179]
It must be a quite excruciatingly miserable translation that could ruin a good
book for a man of intelligence who reads it as a whole without lingering
over each and every expression or sentence. A book that does not possess
such a quality, which even the worst translator can scarcely ruin for a man
of intelligence, is certainly not written for posterity.
[189]
It was once fashionable, and perhaps still is, to add to the title of a novel the
words a true story. This is an innocent deception; that, however, the words a
novel are omitted from some recent history books is not so innocent. [195]
Comparison of a preacher and a locksmith: The one says: “You should
not want to steal”; and the other says: “You should not be able to
steal.”
[219]

158

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

To doubt something, all that is required is very often merely to fail
to understand it. Certain men have been all too ready to reverse this
proposition, claiming that we fail to understand their propositions if we
doubt them.
[238]
The Socratic method sharpened—I mean torture.

[242]

To think and reflect anxiously about what we might have done is the worst
[253]
thing we can do.
What is said of the benefits and harms of the Enlightenment can certainly
be well represented in a fable of fire. It is the soul of inorganic nature; its
use in moderation makes life enjoyable for us, and it warms our winters and
illuminates our nights. But this must be done with candles and torches—
to illuminate the streets with burning houses is a quite wicked form of
illumination. Children must also not be allowed to play with it. [257]
The content, the specific weight of a man’s intelligence and talents, is his
absolute value multiplied by the mean probability of his lifespan, that is, by
his distance from the usual end of progress.—This is entirely comprehensible,
for me at least.
[271]
Since the discovery of writing, requests have lost much of their force while
commands have become more forceful. This is ill balanced. Written requests
are more easily rejected and written commands more easily given than verbal
ones. Both require a heart that is often absent when the mouth must speak.
[275]
It is so very modern to place a funeral urn on top of a grave while the
body rots in a box below. And this funeral urn is again a mere symbol of
a funeral urn; it is merely the tombstone of a funeral urn.
[276]
I read Heydenreich’s Letters on Atheism, and I must confess that contrary to
his intention the letters of the atheist seem to be much more convincing
than those of the believers. I am not entirely unfamiliar with the exertion
of my reason, nor do I lack good will, yet I am unable to be convinced
completely by some of the believer’s assertions. Too much reliance is placed
on the dissemination of moral consciousness, and I would almost like to
say that behind this proposition lies the intention to make us believe we

Notebook K

159

are morally ill if we do not understand the assertions. If the inventors of
these well-meaning propositions possessed a recognized infallibility, we could
accustom ourselves to regarding their propositions as true, and for their part
they could proclaim: “Thy faith hath made thee whole.”—But what use to
mankind is such a proof of the existence of God and immortality, which
hardly one in a thousand is capable of understanding or actually feeling.
If belief in God and immortality is really to have any use in a world such
as this one, it must become more accessible, or it is as good as none at
all.98
[288]
We should not lie down to sleep without being able to say we have learned
something that day. By this I do not mean for example a word we did not
previously know; this is nothing. But if anyone wishes to do this, I have
nothing against it, even if it need be just before extinguishing the light.
No, what I understand by learning is the expansion of the limits of our
scientific or otherwise useful knowledge, the rectification of an error in
which we have long found ourselves, certainty in some things about which
we have long been uncertain, a clear conception of what was unclear to us,
knowledge of truths with broad consequences, and so on. What makes this
endeavor useful is that we cannot quickly dispense with the matter before
blowing out the light, but our activities throughout the entire day must be
directed toward it. Even the will is important in such resolutions; I mean
by this the constant endeavor to satisfy the requirement.
[297]
Regarding things of a large scale, ask always: “What is this on a small scale?”
And with the small: “What is this on a large scale? How does this appear
on a large or small scale?”—It is also good to make something as general
as possible and explore from top to bottom the entire series of which it
is a member. All things belong to such a series whose polar members no
longer appear to belong together.
[301]
Doubt all things at least once, even the proposition that two times two
equals four.
[303]
In our investigation of nature, we have fallen into such a deep rut that we
always follow others. We must find our way out.
[306]
How many ideas float about dispersed in my mind of which many pairs, if
they were ever to meet, could produce the greatest discoveries. But they lie

160

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

as far apart as the sulfur of Goslar from the saltpeter of the East Indies and
the charcoal piles of the Eichsfeld, which when combined would produce
gunpowder. How long must the ingredients of gunpowder have existed
before gunpowder! There is no natural aqua regia. If in our reflections
we surrender ourselves to the natural combinations of the forms of our
understanding and reason, our concepts often adhere so tightly to others
that they cannot combine with those to which they really belong. If only
there were something here like a solution in chemistry where the individual
parts float about lightly suspended and thus can follow any current. But
because this is not possible, we must deliberately bring things together. We
[308]
must experiment with ideas. [. . .]
I believe that among all our heuristic pulleys none is more effective than
what I have called “paradigmata.” [. . .]
[312]
By means of a paradigma chosen from physics, I believe one could have
discovered Kantian philosophy.
[313]
This rule of thumb for inventing by means of paradigmata is obviously of
no help to fools, for they are incapable of inventing precisely because they
are fools. Yet even clever minds must be prodded to see something new;
indeed, it is almost only by such means that new things can be discovered
by new paths. If, as Kästner speculates, Newton discovered the law of gravity
through his theory of light, then it was a paradigma. With regard to this
expedient, we cannot too often remember that the clever mind still retains its
natural freedom and thus that the use of such expedients does not obstruct
other paths.
[314]
When something new is discovered, to investigate whether it is a link in a
hidden chain of an entire family of truths. [. . .]
[315]
Whether impenetrability belongs to the universal properties of a physical
body, I do not dare decide. We infer it from experience, which can never
be universal. We also have experiences from which we could conclude the
opposite, as in the effects of light or magnetic material, for example. Here
we avail ourselves of pores, but these again are posited because we take
matter to be impenetrable.
[321]
If only for once we actually really knew what dissolution is. I think dissolution
is a word like attraction that denotes a phenomenon whose mechanical cause

Notebook K

161

we do not know. It appears to be a penetration of matters. (Kant, if I am
not mistaken, expressed such an idea). It seems at least that dissolution is
not the final degree of division.99
[325]
Everything in this world is composite; we need now only investigate how
properly to divide it and to make one matter appear primary among others.
[327]
This alone is the advantage of making latent things sensible.
In such a complex dispute as that regarding the theory of light, where
Newton and Euler stand at the head of the parties, the question can no
longer simply be: what is the truth of the matter? We should ask instead:
which explanation is the most simple? Through the simple we gain access
to the truth.
[361]
Colored shadows certainly deserve the utmost attention of our natural
scientists. Most think too carelessly about it. People believe the matter has
already been completely explained, but I am inclined to believe that it has
not yet been completely explained; indeed, it could be that the present
state of optics and our entire knowledge of light are not adequate for
explaining such shadows; consequently, an exhaustive examination of this
difficult problem would be a true gain. An important text here is a small
French work whose author identifies himself only as H. F. T. and whom
Herr Gehler mentions in his dictionary article on shadows. He has nearly
the same idea as Herr Goethe.
I have always believed that much of what is needed to solve the
problem of colored shadows lies in a more precise investigation of what it
is we call “white.” A white body, we say, is one that reflects all colors. This
definition not only tacitly presupposes that all colors must be present in
order to be reflected wherever we see something white but also that these
colors must be present in the proper ratio of both quantity and quality.
But where in the world can we expect to find this? Perhaps only in the
purest sunlight on the highest point of the earth’s surface. What then may
be concluded from this? Even in sunlight we never see a white body and
even less so in shadows or under a cloudy sky. Yet even though we can
observe no pure white, we still know very well what we mean by “white.”
For we always correct our sensations through conclusions. So early do we
learn to do this and it becomes such second nature to us that finally we
believe we sense something that we really only conclude. With clothing, it
is the person who wears it and the kind of folds it is arranged in and so
on that makes me think of it always as white, even on a cloudy day or at

162

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

dawn or dusk, though it certainly is not. It is merely concluded, just as
with other colors.100
[366]
Does the phenomenon of blue and yellow shadows not perhaps have
something to do with the nature of taste in Galvanic experiments with
the tongue? We first taste the one when the other is present. I believe this
remark deserves some attention.101
[373]

Notebook L
1796–1799

Often the great men are reproached for not having done as much good as
they could have done. They could reply: “Think of all the evil we could
have done but did not do.”
[9]
Is it not peculiar that when for example one reads Sömmerring’s admirable
writings on the organ of the soul, it appears no more familiar to one than
an essay on the purpose of the rings of Saturn would; and yet the soul is,
if one may still speak here of a location, that which lies nearest to us. Yet
this proximity is of no help, for the thing we can approach is not the thing
we wish to approach. While watching the sun set, if I take a step toward
it, I become closer to it, however little this might be. Things are much
different with the soul. Indeed, it might be possible that by becoming too
close, as with a microscope, one further distances oneself from the thing
one approaches. I see, for example, in the distance a strange mass, and
approaching it I discover that it is a castle, and approaching it further I
discover a window, and so on. This would be sufficient. If I were unfamiliar
with the purpose of the whole, and I investigated it further, I would end up
in an analysis of the stones, which would only lead me further astray.102 [10]
Neither to deny nor to believe.

[18]

To do or think something in this which nobody in the world has yet done
or thought.
[20]
“How is it going?” a blind man asked a crippled man. “As you see,” was
the answer.
[29]

163

164

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

Marriage. Regarding the family register, one should not forget that it only
provides certainty when it is organized according to women. Everybody
knows who his mother is, but nobody knows with such reliability who his
father is.		
[30]
Whether the moon is populated is something the astronomer knows with
about as much reliability as he knows who his father was, but not with the
reliability with which he knows who his mother was.
[31]
Pure philosophy unwittingly still continues and cannot help continuing its
love affair with impure philosophy. And so it will continue until the end
[35]
of time. 		
A philosophy concerned with parsing separates inertia from resistance in a
physical body, just as anthropology separates merely animalistic man from
rational man, but they both actually only exist unified.
[59]
Just because sermons are preached in churches does not mean they do not
[67]
need lightning conductors.
From the differences in standards of measurement something might be
concluded about transcendental understanding. We all measure, but our feet
and miles are different. Nothing hinders us here. Why not in opinions and
religion as well? Why do we not also easily reduce these foreign thoughts
to our own? The answer to this question is certainly not very difficult. [71]
This is surely one of the most peculiar constructions of which the human
language is capable: if one had not been born, one would be free from all
suffering.		
[85]
Müller tells this story in his first remarks on the Copernican revolution:
“Someone was asked to give a definition of God: God, he said, is a sphere
whose center is everywhere and whose surface is nowhere.”103
[95]
If years were seconds, as of today I would have lived exactly one minute.
[. . .] 		
[105]
One of the most peculiar uses man has made of reason is perhaps to think
it a masterpiece never to use it, and thus having been born with wings, to

Notebook L

165

cut them off and descend from the nearest church spire.—The defense of the
monastic life is usually founded on an entirely erroneous concept of virtue.
Better: these people have about the same concept of virtue as those who
wish to call madhouses “academies of science” have of science. [. . .] [114]
A rather audacious philosopher, Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, I think, said
that there are many things in heaven and on earth that are not mentioned
in our compendia. If the simple fellow, who as is well known was not
quite in his right mind, was mocking our physics compendia, we might
confidently reply to him: very well, but then there are also many things in
our compendia that can be found neither in heaven nor on earth. [155]
To send the sense of a letter along with the next mail [. . .]

[158]

A question almost as captivating as whether twins can be step siblings. [183]
A few days ago, I read again that a priest in Liége, if I am not mistaken,
who died at the age of 125, was asked by the bishop what he had done to
become so old. “I have,” he said, “refrained from wine, women, and wrath.”
The important question here, I believe, is: did the man grow so old because
he abstained from such poisons or because he possessed a temperament
that made it possible for him to abstain from such poisons? I think it
impossible not to concede the latter. That someone may shorten his life
with such poisons, indeed, by a great deal, is no proof that his life would be
extended by abstaining from them. Whoever possesses no such temperament
would certainly not extend his life by abstaining from the opposite sex. It
is just the same with the expression that true Christians are always honest
people. There were honest people long before there were Christians, and
there are, thank God, still honest people where there are no Christians.
Indeed, it might even be possible that people are good Christians because
true Christianity compels what they would have been without it. Socrates
would certainly have been an excellent Christian.
[194]
We now possess four principles of morality:
1. a philosophical one: do good for its own sake, out of respect
for the law;
2. a religious one: do good because it is God’s will, out of love
for God;

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

166

3.

a human one: do good because it promotes your happiness,
out of self-love;

4. a political one: do good because it promotes the welfare of
society of which you are a part, out of love of society with
regard to yourself. (All of this is from Reichs-Anzeiger, no.
133, 1797)
But is this not the same principle regarded from different sides? A similar
expression can represent things better for a certain class of people. I do not
see why we should not make the same things comprehensible to certain
classes of people by presenting them using a different image, provided that
with increasing knowledge we find a better one or one that is commensurate
with his progress. I can even conceive of a case in which the human mind
still finds itself tranquil and can see with tranquility that everything is
nothing, provided he has reached this knowledge through the stages of the
most strenuous exertion. Weak-minded men, not adapted to reflection, who
anticipated such knowledge on the basis of faith and belief, would be lost;
and this causes much mischief in the world.104
[195]
What would science be like if humans first learned to see at the age of
fifteen and learned to hear at the age of twenty and thereafter learned to
speak? [. . .]
[198]
What do the English understand by truism? In Latin it would be called
[204]
“verismus.”
It is possible that some aspects of Kantian philosophy may never completely
be understood by anyone and that each will believe the other understands
it better than he, and will thus be satisfied with a vague insight into it, or
even sometimes believe that it is his own incapacity which prevents him
from seeing it as clearly as others do.
[225]
If I were to publish my questions on physics, they would have to be
dedicated only to the young, active physicists, Gren, Herr von Humboldt,
Hildebrandt, Scherer, and others.105
[233]
He did not want to mislead, but he did mislead. It is very sad that the
endeavor of man to diminish evil only increases it. It seems we usually have
more knowledge of the force than of the matter to which it is applied. [236]

Notebook L

167

If this is philosophy, it is at any rate a philosophy that is not quite in its
[239]
right mind.
Everything that we as men must regard as real is for men actually real. For as
soon as it is no longer permitted to conclude something about reality on the
basis of this natural compulsion, any firm principle becomes inconceivable.
One thing would be as uncertain as another. Those who find the proof
of the existence of a supreme being from nature (the cosmological proof )
compelling should accept it; and those who are convinced by the theoretical
or moral proof should accept it. Even those who have pondered over new
proofs have perhaps been induced to do so by a compulsion they themselves
could not quite explain. Instead of giving us their new proofs, they should
have explained the motives that compelled them to search for these proofs,
provided it was not merely fear of consistories or governments.
[253]
“Alas, what would we do,” said the girl, “if our dear God did not exist?”
[254]
Kant says somewhere: “Reason is more polemical than dogmatic.”106 [270]
On October 22, 1797, Herr Thibaut, a man of admirable intelligence, told
me that certain concepts of ordinary arithmetic gave him more difficulty
than many concepts of higher calculus, which are usually considered
difficult.107
[272]
The study of the ancients is now beginning to be revived once again. People
believe they will find salvation there and reinstate the spirit of observation
and the true language of nature. There are a few whom this may help, yet
in this there is doubtless much fashion and very little of the actual truth
or that which accords with human nature and reason. In chivalry, there
is much that is associated with human nature, but the actual practice was
mere fashion, esprit du corps; yet while people were in the middle of it,
they thought it all necessary. It is just the same with the Christian religion.
It is such a warring and quarrelling and scrambling for the veneration of
God that at certain times people must almost have believed they existed
solely to pray and venerate God. I am convinced that most of this is a
mere outgrowth. In the end, there is no other way to venerate God than to
fulfill one’s obligations and to conduct oneself according to the laws given
by reason. There is a God can to my mind mean nothing other than that
with all of my freedom of will I feel obliged to do right. What use do we

168

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

have for God beyond this? This is what God is. If we were to develop this
further, I suspect we would arrive at Herr Kant’s principle. A god who
would objectively intervene when I do wrong does not exist; a judge who
upholds the law or we ourselves must do this. Thus I believe there are really
no mockers of religion, though there certainly are mockers of theology.—
These are outgrowths that are no doubt of various kinds, and among them
are very pleasing ones that through superstition and prejudgment wholly
possess the appearance and gravity of truth. This must be developed further.
In general, our heart recognizes God; but to make this comprehensible to
[275]
reason is indeed difficult, if not impossible.
It is a question whether reason alone, without the heart, would ever have
thought of God. After the heart (fear) had recognized him, reason sought
him as well, just as Bürger sought ghosts.108
[276]
I now really do believe that the question whether objects outside of us posses
objective reality makes no rational sense. We are compelled by our nature to
say of certain objects of our sensation that they are located outside of us;
we cannot do otherwise. See what Kant says about the matter. The question
is almost as ridiculous as asking whether the color blue really is blue. It is
impossible for us to transcend the question. Regarding these things that I
say are outside me, because I must regard them as such, whatever properties
this being-outside-of-me might have, we cannot make any judgments. On
this, read the Theatetus.109
[277]
I was once reading from an English book and shortly thereafter from a
French one on a similar topic. The first was a paper by Deluc on hygrometry,
and the other was Leroy’s paper on the evaporation of water in air in the
French Memoires from 1751. After some time, I noticed quite distinctly
that I had been completely unaware of the change of language while
reading. I seemed to have been reading it all in English or French. I am
convinced that if during this time of undivided attention to the matter I
had found it necessary to consult a German book, I would not have noticed
the transition here either. For as far as mere comprehension is concerned,
especially regarding this subject, the languages are all equally familiar to
me. One may say this much of oneself without fear of being reproached
for boasting as there are certainly countless others in Germany who are
in the same situation. But why do I mention this here? To ask: is it good

Notebook L

169

and advantageous for our minds to become accustomed to this? I find it
impossible to believe that it is. I am not referring here to the loss of time
involved, though it is obviously great, but I believe that it also is harmful
in a psychological respect to have so many signs in our heads for the same
thing. It would be far better if a new sign denoted a new quality instead of
an old one. In the transition from the English work to the French work, I
had to consult an entirely different index, and yet I never noticed it. I would
like to read an examination of this. On ancient languages! And Chinese as
well!!110 		
[278]
The word incomparable shows what can become of words in the world. [288]
Kant’s early, not yet collected works also contain a description of the
earthquake in Lisbon and measurements of its magnitude.111
[292]
Are we too not a cosmic system, and one that we know better, or at least
should know better, than we do the heavens?
[305]
The wiser we become, the more we see in the works of nature. Why then
should there not be a great deal more in certain thoughts than we sometimes
notice? They are also products of human nature. Every thought is in itself
something, the false as well as the true. The false are simply the weeds we
cannot use in our household. [. . .]
[309]
What makes true friendship and even more the joyous bond of marriage so
delightful is the expansion of one’s I over an area that could not be created
in a single person through any art in the world. Two souls that are united are
never so completely united that there does not remain for both a fortunate
difference that makes communication so enjoyable. Someone who complains
to himself of his own suffering does so in vain, but when he complains
to his wife, it is to a self who can provide aid and does so already in its
sympathy. And whoever enjoys hearing his merits praised finds an audience
in her to whom he can praise himself without appearing ridiculous. [310]
Does the soul not find itself in a peculiar situation when it reads an
investigation of itself, thus when it searches in books for what it itself
might be? It is rather like a dog that has had a bone tied to its tail, said
G. C. L., truly but somewhat ignobly.
[311]

170

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

A punch in the stomach robs the mind itself not the stomach of
consciousness. Generally much is often said about the head and the heart
and too little about the stomach, probably because it is located in the
souterrain; but the ancients understood it better. Persius famously awarded
the stomach a master of arts, and since then it may indeed have learned
more.112
[315]
When he philosophizes, he usually casts a pleasant moonlight over the
objects, which is pleasing overall but does not show clearly one single object.
[320]
It is quite certain that we can make judgments about a matter correctly and
wisely, yet as soon as we are required to give our reasons, we are able to
give only such reasons as any novice in the art of fencing can refute. The
wisest and best men often know as little how to do this as they know the
muscles with which they grasp or play the piano. This is quite true and
[328]
deserves to be considered further.
Actual aristocracy cannot be abolished by any law; it can only be decreed
how and with whom it is to be shared.
[334]
Something excellent could certainly be written about superstition, namely,
[356]
in its defense, to show that all men are superstitious. [. . .]
This is one of those so-called flighty sayings that instead of flying about has
soared beyond the clouds. So it goes with flying things. We should know
or learn how to tether them.
[400]
What most clearly characterizes true freedom and its true use is its abuse.
[402]
He reasoned me right out of my reason.

[404]

Motto: to desire to discover the truth is laudable, even if we go astray along
the way.
[421]
To choose one times one as a patron saint.

[427]

Where everybody wants to come as early as possible, it necessarily follows
that by far the greater number come too late.
[432]

Notebook L

171

This means thinking where there are no longer any thoughts: like the
boy who set up bowling pins at twilight, and when someone who had
bowled and missed jokingly asked how many he had struck, the boy naively
answered: “You bowled where there were no pins.”
[444]
When one is refuted in such a way I really do not know what one can still
do with honor, except smash the opponent’s window. [. . .]
[446]
We speak often of enlightenment and desire more light. But, my God, what
good is all of this light when people either have no eyes or deliberately shut
[472]
those they have?
A theory of the folds in a pillow.

[476]

When we are young, we hardly know we are alive. We acquire the feeling
of health only through illness. It is when we jump, or because of the impact
when we fall, that we become aware of the earth’s attraction. When old
age sets in, the state of illness becomes a kind of health, and we no longer
notice we are ill. If memories of the past did not remain, we would not
notice the change. Thus I believe that it is only in our eyes that animals
grow old. A squirrel that on its dying day leads the life of an oyster is no
more unhappy than the oyster. Man, however, who lives in three places—in
the past, the present, and the future—can be unhappy if any one of these
is a failure. Religion has even added a fourth—eternity.
[483]
If necessity is the mother of industriousness or of invention, it remains a
question who is the father or the grandmother or the mother of necessity.
[500]
If necessity is the mother of invention, then the war that caused the necessity
is doubtless the grandfather of invention. A proof using adages could be
called “presque geometrique.”
[524]
The reduction of one’s needs is indeed something that should be inculcated
in youth. “The fewer needs one has, the happier one is” is an old but often
unrecognized truth.
[529]
It has long been observed that when the spirit rises, it lets the body fall to
its knees. [. . .]
[536]

172

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

The word delivery is ambiguous; it could also refer to death.

[543]

Habit is in many matters an evil thing. It makes us take injustice for justice
and error for truth.
[572]
There are people who have so little courage to assert anything that they
do not trust themselves to say that a cold wind is blowing, no matter how
much they may feel it, before they have heard other people say it. [582]
The least credit one can give Kant is that he has become the Basedow of
philosophy.113
[584]
Someone who writes, instead of philosoph or philosopher, philofficer or
even philos-officer.
[586]
The human spirit becomes more uniform the more it rises above the body.
But the nearer it comes again to it, the more frequent are the deviances,
just as I said regarding the planets.
[618]
[. . .] The question is always whether in the end the spirit of contradiction
[622]
is not on the whole more useful than unity and agreement.
If they were to stand still, we would regard even shooting stars as stars. [643]
Kant differentiates himself from other philosophers in turning his primary
attention to the instrument; he investigates its quality and primarily its limits,
how far it extends, and whether it is suited to accounting for the things
of which one wishes to provide an account; that is, he is investigating the
nature of our faculty of cognition.—What right do we have to suppose that
our sensations are anything more than our sensations? What is reality for us
(perhaps to us)? What is existence? May we use “faculty of cognition”? [662]
A comparison between very heterogeneous things.

[665]

With most people, disbelief in one thing is founded on blind belief in
another. 		
[674]
In England a man was charged with bigamy, and his lawyer got him off by
proving his client had three wives.
[681]

Notebook L

173

Applying Kantian philosophy in a practical treatise without using Kant’s
[689]
expressions would certainly secure acclaim for his philosophy.
Is it not peculiar that men are so glad to fight for religion and so reluctant
to live according to its precepts?
[705]
What Kant really says is that we assume things in themselves lie behind
all phenomena, but we cannot know whether reality can be attributed to
this assumption, whether it in fact corresponds to what is assumed. [740]
Could it not also be the case, as G. C. L. has remarked, that like colors,
tones, and scents, extension exists as a result of our sense organs? [. . .] [793]
To distinguish more sharply between inner and outer sense freely and
without fear of man.
[796]
The image of the child who strikes the table after bumping into it is here the
most correct one; it precedes rationality, and that is what we wish to know.
Someone who has had a cataract operation sees all bodies as if they were
lying on his eye; this is correct. Sensation lies in the eye, and its distance
from his own I, which is already again a composite of feeling and inference,
has been learned through feeling—in fact, it is astonishing that there are
so few material idealists in this world and so many formal idealists. [798]
Beginning: Because our mind, under which I understand the entire sum
of our capacities, without seeing a difference between body and soul (our
faculty of cognition), is actually the instrument upon whose knowledge
everything that we will here be examining depends, it can thus do no
harm to say a few words about this instrument. The astronomer describes
his instruments. Here man with his capacities is the instrument, which is
something that is not described in standard physics. We assume the apparatus
is already familiar.—But the opinions here differ; that is to say, there are
many constitutions or capacities, and it is disputable, or actually debatable,
which is the best. There are various opinions about the constitution of the
instrument. Now a short presentation of man according to his capacities.
Internal and external objects.
[799]
There is no bridge that leads beyond our thoughts to the objects. Very true,
and well expressed (not πμ).114
[805]

174

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

If we could learn to invent according to certain rules such as the so-called
loci topoi for example, or if reason could set itself in motion, it would be
like discovering how to enlarge animals or cultivate oak trees from brush.
There is an element of chance, it seems, in all discoveries, even those we
seem to arrive at through effort. Putting things already discovered into the
best order, even the great leaps of discovery seem just as little the work of
our free will as is the beating of our heart.—This seems to me just as when
the improvements we confer on states through discursive reason are merely
slight modifications; we can create new species but cannot create genera,
for chance must do that. Experiments must therefore be undertaken in
natural philosophy, and in great affairs we must wait for the proper time.
I understand myself. What I have said elsewhere belongs here: we should
not say I think but it thinks, just as one says it lightnings.115
[806]
With just the same degree of certainty with which we are convinced that
something occurs within us, we are also convinced that something occurs
outside us. We understand the words inside and outside very well. There can
be no one in this world and unlikely one born who would not sense this
difference; and for philosophy that is sufficient. It should not go beyond this;
to do so would be wasted effort and lost time. For whatever the things might
be, it is agreed that we can know absolutely nothing of them except what lies
in our representations. In this regard, which I believe is correct, the question
as to whether the things really are outside of us and really are as we see
them is utterly without sense. Is it not peculiar that man absolutely demands
to have things twice when once would have been sufficient and necessarily
must be sufficient since there exists no bridge from our representations to
their causes? We cannot think of anything as existing without a cause, but
where then lies this necessity? The answer again is within us, inasmuch
as it is completely impossible for us to go outside of ourselves. It really
matters little to me if one wishes to call this idealism. Nothing depends
on the name. At least it is an idealism that through idealism recognizes
that there exist things outside of it and that everything has its cause; what
more do we want? There is no other reality for men, at least not for the
philosophical. In ordinary life, we are rightly satisfied with a lower station.
But I believe with complete conviction: either we must completely abstain
from philosophizing about these matters or philosophize thus. In the light
of this conception, it is easy to see how right Herr Kant is to regard space
and time as mere forms of intuition. Nothing else is possible.
[811]

Notebook L

175

How many cases are possible here? How can the word be understood? In how
[829]
many senses?
Question: what is light and what is ponderous? Answer: to pose such
questions is a light matter, to answer them, ponderous.
[833]
Is it not curious that geometry begins with a particular case, with the
position of lines on a plane? This might be the easiest way to proceed, but
whether it is scientific is another question. Really, the possibility of a plane
must be proven. I only fear that if one takes the philosophy of mathematics
too far and takes it too far away from common sense, it will lose on the
[834]
whole.		
We see everything on a plane, projected on a piece of glass; the image
itself upon which our representations depend is depicted on a sphere, the
posterior wall of the eye.
[835]
In the book Theaetetus, there is supposed to be something said regarding
the bridge about which I often speak and about which I continue to think,
namely, the bridge from our representations to things in themselves. [836]
Question: how is whispering differentiated from speaking? [. . .]

[844]

Reflect on the actual limits of physics, and read Schelling’s Ideas for a
Philosophy of Nature.116
[850]
Guide for a coherent presentation of commonly used propositions of physics as
preparation for a future science of nature. This could be the title of a physics
compendium. Certainly everything would need to be explained well in the
preface. The way people attempt to move away so much from ordinary
human understanding, which is something quite respectable, truly does not
appeal to me despite how commendable such an endeavor might in some
respects be. Common sense is in my opinion a very respectable rung on the
ladder of our knowledge and really of the power of our mind in general
so that it might very well be regarded as a point from which all reckoning
begins. It is not the zero point of the scale that is under discussion but
what starting point I must assume in 1799 in order to secure the greatest
possible benefit. If I do not proceed according to this standard, but choose

176

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

a different starting point, then perhaps I will convince one speculative mind
and in contrast lose one hundred who in the nineteenth century may have
contributed to drawing many back to this point. Or similarly considered: the
starting point of our natural philosophy is like that of a thermometer, etc.
I am not disinclined to believe that in the future a mischievous skepticism will succeed in spreading itself among the mathematical sciences.
Indeed, to tell the truth, I no longer have any doubts about this. And why
should I doubt it given that we must necessarily find everywhere limits to
our knowledge and consequently uncertainty as soon as we begin to explain
how something is possible and why it is possible? And if we do not wish
to begin from a certain universally acknowledged point on a scale, then we
should begin from a merely acknowledged one. Euclid begins with common sense in his axioms. That between two points only one straight line
is possible is a postulate impossible to prove, though indeed it may be
otherwise given another form of representation. For are not all arcs whose
radii = ∞; ∞2; ∞3 straight lines that intersect the same point? Thus there
are countless straight lines possible between two points. Or if infinitesimal
calculus does not belong with Euclid’s Elements, then woe is us if we do
not say: “Here is where we wish to begin our calculations.”—I believe it is
enough to make do with uncertainty on one side of the beginning of abscissae without concerning ourselves too early with the difficulties of the other
side. Let some study our soul and some, the physical world and thus in
the end come together. The starting point of the calculations of common
sense is certainly no fixed point, but a mean can be established that may
be regarded without detriment as the starting point and really has always
been regarded as such. It is in fact sad that we call men profound thinkers
who lead our knowledge back to this limit and then wish to bring things
that lie at different endpoints of what is comprehensible back to a single
incomprehensible thing.
[852]
There is a great difference between decisively establishing a hypothesis and
adding up all possible kinds of explanations. For as long as I am removed
from the truth and assume certain propositions that are not yet exhaustive,
then many solutions are possible; and precisely this possibility is a direct
demonstration that we are still removed from the truth. As long as we have
not attained it, we must count everything. There is a kind of indeterminacy
in the task. [. . .]
[861]
It is always peculiar that we so often speak of our persistence after death and
so little about our existence before birth. I should think given our uncertain

Notebook L

177

circumstances with respect to the future, about which everything assures us,
that it would be much more natural to concern ourselves with this. What
the surface of the earth once was can still reasonably be imagined. What
will become of it, we do not know. One need not object that we know
our soul, our I, much better than the earth (This is, however, an important
question). Granted this, however, it is evident that in conclusions about
what we will become, we consider too little what we were before birth. A
fearless consideration of this time would certainly be influential and would
reveal much more about our condition after death than all of our current
sophistic chatter. We should not say after death but before and after life.—It
will likely make no difference.—More should be said about this later—the
[865]
lamp before it was lit and after it was extinguished.
I do not believe that any great discovery has ever been made in the natural
sciences through calculation. Nor is this its object. But as soon as chance
or practical insight has discovered something, mathematics provides the best
conditions for it; given the matter is a certain way as a whole, mathematics
demonstrates what the most appropriate form and disposition would be.—
Nothing more.
[866]
I do not understand at all how this so-called being outside of us is supposed
to make the matter more comprehensible; for if it does make things more
comprehensible, then it is again only the representation of being outside
of us, which inevitably accompanies the representation, that makes it
comprehensible. It is necessary to express ourselves this way, but it is not
thereby decided on which side the necessity lies. The necessity could lie
in us just as well as outside us, which already seems to beg the question.
[867]
Is reason or perhaps the understanding really in a better position when it
arrives at final causes than when it arrives at a dictate of the heart? For it
remains a great question which of the two most firmly connects us with
our surrounding world, the heart or reason.
[878]
To invent new errors.

[886]

Man has today so far surpassed himself that he even has a science in which
all new inventions are inventions of new errors, and all new discoveries are
discoveries of old errors.
[887]

178

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

That Lesage postulates a primus motor and matter, concepts that according
to Kant already contain that which they are supposed to explain, is certainly
[893]
a deficiency of the system.
It is incontestably an error on the part of the atomists that they postulate
matter but do not consider that to postulate it as having the capacity for
impact, force, and movement means postulating nearly everything. For how
an atom of a particular form arises is not a hair more comprehensible to
me than how the sun came into existence. It is unfortunate that the best
minds so enjoy venturing into the groundless and enjoy hearing the crowds
wonder at their boldness, and would rather be called daredevils than quiet
cultivators of a ground whose firmness the entire world recognizes. [894]
Dr. Hutton makes a very nice observation in his article Attraction: If in
physics we did not wish to admit effects whose causes are not objects of our
senses, a large gap would arise. If, however, we do wish to concern ourselves
with the explanation of causes that are not objects of our senses, we run
the danger of erecting castles in the air. We can perhaps stop at the effect
and think about the causes in any way we wish. Newton vacillated on the
cause of gravity: in the Optics, he sometimes inclines toward an immaterial
cause and sometimes toward a material one.117 [. . .]
[896]
If we consider impartially what astronomy incontestably teaches us,
namely, that matter attracts over distances, then we cannot understand
why this attraction cannot be called a fundamental force of matter, just as
impenetrability is. In the former, parts of matter approach each other, and
in the latter, this approach is limited. Why can impenetrability not also be
explained according to impact? The circularity becomes evident here because
without impenetrability, no mechanical impact is possible. We are compelled
here to posit a fundamental force. The question now is whether the equally
as universal phenomenon that parts of matter cannot separate themselves
from one another, I mean attractive force, is not also a fundamental force. I
do not see what could justifiably be argued against this. That the attractive
force of matter extends over an immense distance into the infinite is no
less incomprehensible to me than this repulsive force. Regarding the one, I
cannot say where it begins, and regarding the other, where it ends; but it
must begin somewhere, otherwise no physical body could arise. We see again
on both sides the infinite, and I believe we should congratulate ourselves
when in such metaphysical reflections we find ourselves at this limit. Even

Notebook L

179

in mathematics the advancements were tremendous after it began to proceed
from this point. This point must be arrived at, and it was fortunate for the
sciences that this great wellspring was discovered before it had completely
justified itself before the court of reason for this audacious endeavor. The
justification cannot in the end fail since the success itself was greater and
more beneficial than all expectations.—People believed they could manage
by saying that matter fills space through mere existence. Fundamentally,
nothing, however, is said with this, and it is probably a little trick that the
imagination of these philosophers has played. For the question is precisely:
what does it mean to exist? And how must a thing express its relation to
[897]
me and my faculty of cognition such that I can say it exists?
Men have written much about the essence of matter; I only wish that matter
would for once begin to write about the human mind. It would show that
thus far we have not understood one another very well.
[908]
Might not much of what Herr Kant teaches, especially with regard to the
moral law, be a consequence of old age, where passion and appetite have
lost their force and reason alone remains?—If human beings died at say
the age of forty still in possession of their full virility, what consequences
would this have for the world? The calm wisdom of old age produces many
curious things. Will there ever be a state where everyone is slaughtered at
forty-five?
[910]
It seems to me that everything in nature is produced by proportions in
the causes and not by essential differences. This again is an application of
my idea that everything is in everything. All men are the same in their
constitution, only proportions make the difference; and only the different
proportions make the honest man and the rogue.
[916]
It is a powerful objection against the atomistic system that it first posits
things, which cannot be posited without assuming forces, and then posits
forces to explain the rest. It is just as impossible to deduce impenetrability
and inertia from the concept of mere existence as it is to deduce attractive
force, acidity, or redness. This notwithstanding, the doctrine of atomism
has its advantages: 1. It adheres more closely to the customary concepts,
and this also must be respected; 2. It is useful for mathematics because it
simplifies the application of mathematics to nature. This system will always
remain an invaluable picture; indeed, the recourse to this metaphysics is not

180

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

thereby inhibited. Thus perhaps the two systems should not so much be
opposed to one another as their dependence upon one another should be
shown. It should be noted that they would soon understand one another
if they explained themselves clearly (to be taken cum grano salis).
[917]
It would be worthwhile for once to compare the systems of Kant and
Lesage, the attractionist and the impulsionist. There is so much in each that
corresponds to the other that it would be worthwhile to compare them.
[918]
Attractive force—impact; initial forces, initial bodies.
Attraction and repulsion—we speak of them as of different things, and indeed
this is demanded by linguistic usage, and our entire communication in the
literature depends on it. But by ascribing to bodies a force of attraction
and denying them a force of repulsion, we are dealing with a one-sidedness
that reason cannot endorse. We live to be sure in the region of attraction,
in a place where it prevails; our bodies can exist only on the basis of it;
we are fixed in it, as are our plants and our sun; but without being Jacob
Böhme, I can conceive of a being existing in the region of repulsion that
would fill all the heavens.
[919]
We can enlarge a milletseed immensely, but we cannot make a second
of time into a minute or a quarter-hour. How amazing it would be if
we could! If only we tried more to shrink time, we should say, instead of
shorten it.
[925]
Is it really so evident that our reason can have absolutely no knowledge of
the supersensible? Might man not be capable of weaving his ideas of God
just as purposefully as the spider weaves its web to catch flies? Or in other
words: might there not exist beings who would admire us for our ideas of
God and immortality just as we admire the spider and the silkworm? [952]
Is our concept of God indeed anything more than personified inconceivability?		
[953]
Herr Schubert in his Astronomy (I own a copy myself ) has the quite nice
idea that it has not yet been established whether Ptolemy really wished to
deliver a system. It may merely be a construction for solving the problem
of the location of a planet. NB. In this work there is also a similar account
of how Copernicus arrived at the true conception of the universe.118 [963]

Notebook L

181

Regarding what was said previously about the Ptolemaic system: constructions
are of great use in our hypotheses. If we are to present the fundamental
propositions of physics as purely as the geometrician presents his, we must
also be able to make constructions, at least in the way Ptolemy did. And here
the question is: which hypothesis allows the best construction? We can thus
never go too deep. In my opinion Herr Kant tried to accomplish this. [967]
I believe that man is ultimately so free a being that his right to be what he
[972]
believes himself to be cannot be contested.
Fichte and Niethammer’s Philosophical Journal, 1798, issues 1 through 4 has
appeared and is banned with a fifty-Reichstaler fine. I must read it because
the second volume contains a transcendental speculation on the theory of
fire by Sauer.119
[973]
Our best minds are now sitting down to account for the teachings of Aristotle,
and the dispute between mind and mind is now a pathetic squabble between
philosophy and grammar. What is the point? We truly do a disservice to
human nature when we believe that in order to have an opinion we must
know what opinion another had. Granted, they may have some use as a
resource. Why do people no longer study physics and mathematics and seek
Aristotle first in themselves? We would be much more advanced if instead
of accounting for what the ancients, who had much fewer resources, taught,
we rather sought to account for what they should have taught. There are,
above all in Germany, plenty of men (they are not great illuminators but
sometimes carry a great light) who trade in the ideas of others and who
find it a great merit to have discovered that a tenet thought new is already
old. Tant mieux. That makes it all the more true. Yet such comments are
also not made, quod probe notandum, to belittle the truth, but are done
with the laudable intention to harm and belittle living men.
[974]
If we compare the older writings of our theologians with the newer ones,
we must truly be astonished. The ideas of immediate revelation, atonement,
and so on are really now being presented by them in the way that people
who were considered free spirits, derided, and ridiculed previously did. This
is easy to understand. People think it beneath their dignity to concede
and would thus rather persecute because they have the power to. Now we
have arrived at where those previous free spirits were. Thus we ought never
criticize the audacious deeds of this voluntary regiment. It could happen

182

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

that the main army finds it necessary to use them. This is happening now.
What can we conclude from this for the future? Presumably that in the
end we must arrive at a religion of reason. In the end, everything comes
down to this must; and this is also the boundary of God. It is only a pity
that even there dissent occurs.—Why do we not see the parts of doctrines
of belief, which history offers us, as parts of a series, whose subsequent
parts we must be able to show? It is obvious that from what is given we
can here also draw further conclusions; but we do not dare because our
current political constitutions are for our reason precisely something like
what sensibility is for reason. The state is our expanded body; the spirit of
man has more than one body with whose nonspirituality it must struggle:
our own flesh and blood, wife and child, professions, the city, and our
studies, the constitution of the state, and so on. Yet in the end, there are
always the dictates of reason (for professors the faculty also belongs here).
[975]
This can be extended to all bodies.
If one brought together three highly virtuous men—A, B, C—of whom one
was a Protestant, another a Catholic, and the other a Fichtean, and examined
them closely, one would find that each has nearly the same belief in God,
but none entirely has the belief to which he would confess if he had to
confess in words. For it is a great advantage of human nature that the most
virtuous men can rarely truly say why they are virtuous, and when they
believe they preach their beliefs, they actually do not preach them. [980]
To wish to reduce everything in man to simple principles means in the
end, it seems, to presuppose that such a principium must exist, and how
can this be proved?
[981]
Herr Fichte seems to forget that there are people for whom it is impossible to
see in the distance without glasses, who cannot hear without an ear trumpet,
and who cannot walk without crutches. He should now teach the people
to eat raw meat because the animals in the field have no kitchen.120 [982]

